1112

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, SEPTEMBER 2016

Financial Stress Through Complexity Science

Apit Hemakom, Student Member, IEEE, Theerasak Chanwimalueang, Student Member, IEEE, Alicia Carrion,

Lisa Aufegger, Anthony G. Constantinides, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Danilo P. Mandic, Fellow, IEEE

AbstractFinancial markets typically undergo periods of pros-
perity followed by periods of stagnation, and this undulation makes
it challenging to maintain market efciency. The efcient market
hypothesis (EMH) states that there exist differences in structural
complexity in security prices between regular and abnormal sit-
uations. Yet, despite a clear link between market acceleration (cf.
recession in security prices) and stress in physical systems, indices
of nancial stress still have signicant scope for further develop-
ment. The overarching aim of this work is therefore to determine
the characteristics of nancial indices related to nancial stress,
and to establish a robust metric for the extent of such stress. This
is achieved based on intrinsic multiscale analysis which quanti-
es the so called complexity-loss hypothesis in the context of -
nancial stress. The multiscale sample entropy and our proposed
Assessment of Latent Index of Stress methods have successfully
assessed nancial stress, and have served as a measure to establish
an analogy between transitions from normal (relaxed) to abnor-
mal (stressed) nancial periods with the sympatho-vagal balance
in humans. Four major stock indices of the US economy over the
past 25 years are considered: (i) Dow Jones Industrial Average, (ii)
NASDAQ Composite, (iii) Standard & Poors 500, and (iv) Rus-
sell 2000, together with FTSE 100, CAC 40 and exchange rates.
Our ndings support the EMH theory and reveal high stress for
both the periods of Internet bubble burst and sub-prime mortgage
crisis.

Index TermsAssessment of Latent Index of Stress (ALIS)
index, complexity-loss hypothesis, determinism, nancial stress,
intrinsic phase synchrony (IPS), multiscale entroypy, nonlinearity.

I. INTRODUCTION

I NDICES of major stock markets are generally accepted as

indicators of the nancial health and economic wellbeing
[1], [2]. Given their close link with socio-economic and
geo-political factors (here, we refer to those as events) the
latent dynamics of stock indices are also a reliable indicator of
the inuence those events have on the health of the nancial
system. To put this into context, in the last 25 years the US alone
have been through a number of events, including the dot-com

Manuscript

received October 15, 2015;

revised May 01, 2016
and June 07, 2016; accepted June 07, 2016. Date of publication
June 15, 2016; date of current version August 12, 2016.
This
supported by the Financial Signal Processing Laboratory
work was
(http://www.fsplab.com/) at
Imperial College London. The guest editor
coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication
was Prof. Ali N. Akansu.

A. Hemakom, T. Chanwimalueang, L. Aufegger, A. G. Constantinides,
and D. P. Mandic are with the Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2BT U.K. (e-mail:
apit.hemakom12@imperial.ac.uk; theerasak.chanwimalueang13@imperial.ac.
uk; l.aufegger@imperial.ac.uk; a.constantinides@imperial.ac.uk; d.mandic@
imperial.ac.uk).

A. Carrion is with the Universit`at Polit`ecnica de Val`encia, Valencia, Spain

(e-mail: alcarga4@upv.es).

Color versions of one or more of the gures in this paper are available online

at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

Digital Object Identier 10.1109/JSTSP.2016.2581299

boom in the 1990s, the 9/11 terrorist attack in 2001 and the
sub-prime mortgage crisis in 2008. It is therefore natural to
ask whether a general health of the economy, seen through the
lens of stock indices, can be assessed in a way analogous to
the way we examine health of living organisms. This motivates
us to embark upon the signicant body of work on human
stress in order to derive indicators of stress of the nancial
system and establish biomarkers of characteristic events in
stock indices. To this end, we employ the so-called complexity-
loss hypothesis which states that organisms experiencing
lower structural
constraints (illness, ageing, stress) exhibit
complexity of
responses than healthy
organisms. Our analysis falls under this general umbrella, but
is nance-specic and employs nonparametric analyses of
the determinism (via predictability), nonlinearity, multiscale
entropy, and synchrony, within an intrinsic multivariate analysis
framework.

their physiological

In technical terms, stock indices exhibit trendslocal and
global rst order characteristics [3]together with economic
and non-economic cyclical inuences (e.g., the four-year pres-
idential cycle in the US) and effects of our habits, such as the
Sell in May stock trading strategy and the Christmas sales effect
[4]. Trends in nancial indices are perhaps their most examined
characteristics, with both numerical and graphical methods used
for their detection. Stock market volatility, on the other hand,
reects the degree of uncertainty in stock indices. Financial an-
alysts are therefore interested in patterns in historical data in
order to predict nancial crashesan often disputed practice
called technical analysis [5], [6]. A very popular numerical
technical analysis method is the class of moving-average (MA)
algorithms which yield indicators of general movements of stock
prices such as: (i) price MA for raw data with trend, and (ii) rate
of change at different scales, for detrended data. The price MAs
allow investors to compare uctuations in stocks to the trends
over time, while the rates of change are relatively faithful indi-
cators of the momentum of stocks. For example, a positive value
of the rate of change suggests enough market support to con-
tinue driving prices in the direction of the current trend, while
its negative value indicates lack of market support and tendency
for stock values to become stagnant or to reverse.

The efcient market hypothesis (EMH) is a cornerstone of
modern nancial theory and states that current security prices
(the underlying value of the asset) incorporate and reect all
relevant information that could be gathered, so that stocks al-
ways trade at fair value [7]. This implies that in normal sit-
uations markets cannot be consistently beaten over long time;
in other words, the security prices tend to exhibit a random
walk type of behaviour, characterised by poor predictability
from their historical values and high uncertainty in the rate of
change of stock prices. However, when speculative economic
bubblesabnormal situationsoccur, the markets are often
driven by buyers who are prone to sentiment or irrational ex-

1932-4553  2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.

See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HEMAKOM et al.: FINANCIAL STRESS THROUGH COMPLEXITY SCIENCE

1113

uberance. In such scenarios, the buyers tend to overestimate
stock values while anticipating the growth of markets, which
in turn brings less uncertainty to the rate of change of future
prices. This acceleration-stabilisation type of behaviour is not
dissimilar to the sympatho-vagal balance in humans, whereby
the sympathetic autonomous nervous system (SNS) accelerates
body functions while the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS)
slows them down [8].

In human sciences, stress is dened as a non-specic neu-
roendocrine response [9]. In the same way, we propose to dene
the nancial stress as a non-specic deviation from its normal
functioning. There is no agreement on a more specic de-
nition, as episodes of nancial stress often vastly differ, from
dot-com bubble through to sub-prime mortgage crisis. A risk
(stress) indicator specic to currency markets was proposed in
[10], and denes nancial risk through a reduction in the num-
ber of signicant factorsprincipal components. However, the
suggestions that a decrease in the degrees of freedom invariably
signies the loss of complexity during an episode of crisis is
not necessarily valid; to this end, higher-order features related
to long-range couplings also need to be examined [11], for ex-
ample those manifested in long-term correlation, which is the
basis for practical structural complexity analysis. The degree
of determinism (predictability) of the signal, in addition, also
plays an important role in determining the degree of complexity
[12]. The nancial stress index (FSI) proposed in [13] con-
siders the variations in the intensity and duration of nancial
stress episodes through high-frequency (HF) price variables.
Based on an equal-variance weighted average, nancial stress
is detected when the value of the FSI exceeds one standard de-
viation above the trend (using the Hodrick-Prescott lter); the
FSI also indicates whether an episode of nancial stress is due
to stress in banking, securities, or foreign exchange sectors. The
FSI in [14] focuses on market responses in the securities, ex-
change and banking sectors. It evaluates monthly changes in the
degree of stress transmission and the stress co-movement be-
tween advanced and emerging economies [15], [16]. Financial
stress is then deemed present if the index exceeds 1.5 standard
deviations above its mean [17]; the FSI also provides estima-
tion of the type of crisis, for example, the EMPI component
was able to capture 80% of the currency crisis found in the
literature.

In addition to specic indices which capture a particular as-
pect of nancial stress, composite indices include the Chicago
Fed National Activity Index and the Kansas City FSI [18], which
are calculated over a range of variables. Our approach falls be-
tween these two categoriesit is composite in the sense that
it simultaneously analyses several individual market indices,
while being specic enough to examine the balance/imbalance
aspect of markets. In an analogy to the sympatho-vagal bal-
ance in human stress research, we consider the biomarkers
of nancial stress to be accelerations followed by recessions in
stock indices. The market expansions are therefore interpreted
similarly to the effects of the SNS activity in humans, and are
characterised by investors over-excitement, over-condence,
and heuristic approaches. Market recessions are then analogous
to the effects of the PNS, whereby the nancial slow-down is
accompanied by a lack of condence and a decrease in market
efciency.

During a nancial crisis, the term systemic risk refers to a
series of correlated defaults among nancial institutions, occur-
ring over a short time span and triggering withdrawal of liquidity
and a widespread loss of condence in the nancial system as a
whole. At the heart of the concept is the notion of contagion, a
particularly strong propagation of failures from one institution,
market, or system to another. Five different measures of sys-
tematic risk were proposed in [19], based on statistical relations
among the market returns of hedge funds, banks, brokers and
insurance companies. Using the correlations, cross-correlations,
PCA, regime-switching models, and Granger causality tests, it
was found that all the four sectors have become highly inter-
related and less liquid over the past decade, an indicator of
increased level of systemic risk in nance and insurance indus-
tries. These measures can also identify and quantify nancial
crisis periods.

The absorption ratio [20] is an indicator of market fragility
and systemic risk, and is dened as the fraction of the total vari-
ance of a set of assets explained or absorbed by a nite set of
eigenvectors. A high value for the absorption ratio corresponds
to a high level of systemic risk and fragility. For example, high
values of absorption ratio of the US stock market during the
dot-com bubble and the global nancial and sub-prime mort-
gage crises suggested that the market was extremely fragile and
vulnerable to negative shocks, which propagated quickly and
broadly in both periods. The absorption ratio can also be used
as a warning for investors, as on average, stock prices decreased
following one-standard-deviation spikes in the absorption ratio,
and increased after one-standard-deviation drops in the absorp-
tion ratio.

The 10-by-10-by-10 approach for the assessment of sys-
temic nancial risk related to stress scenarios was proposed in
[21], and involves three factors: nancial institutions, a num-
ber of counterparties and stress tests. The total of gains and
losses of each stress test for each institution (also counterparty)
is calculated and then reported periodically.

This all indicates a void in the literature when it comes to the
quantication of both nancial stress and systemic risk. To this
end, in an analogy to human stress (sympatho-vagal imbalance)
the signatures of which are derived from the low-frequency (LF)
and high-frequency (HF) bands within heart rate variability, we
propose the Assessment of Latent Index of Stress (ALIS) which
examines the LF and HF bands in detrended nancial data.
Our rationale is that low-frequency changes (LF band), which
correspond to time spans of over 1 year, are driven by global
factors (monetary policies), whereas the more rapid changes
(HF band), over spans of 5 days to 3 months, signify abrupt
events, such as the 9/11 crisis and the Internet bubble burst.

The ALIS index therefore determines crisis versus no-crisis
episodes of the nancial stress evolution through the examina-
tion of long- and short-term changes in specic stock indices,
whereas the existing FSIs in [13], [14], [18] consider several
sub-components, such as stock market returns and time-varying
stock market return volatility, which may be responsible for the
onset and development of nancial stress. While the ALIS index
is not designed for specic analyses using nancial market vari-
ables as potential cofounders for nancial stress, it is one of the
rst methods which extends beyond the second order analysis

1114

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, SEPTEMBER 2016

in [13], [14], [18] to detect the patterns of nancial crises in
specic nancial indices using a bio-inspired signal processing
approach.

II. SUMMARY OF MOTIVATION AND CONTRIBUTION

Inspired by the catastrophe theory [22] and the EMH theory,
we propose the ALIS index as an indicator of nancial stress
during episodes of nancial crises in different individual stock
indices. Following on the complexity-loss theory, nancial sys-
tems are shown to exhibit lower levels of structural complexity
during nancial crises, compared to normal periods [1]. We
also introduce the moving-average multivariate sample entropy
(MA-MSE) algorithm to quantify different degrees of such com-
plexity. The recurrence quantication analysis (RQA) and delay
vector variance (DVV) are then employed so as to establish the
ground truth of the deterministic (predictable) versus stochastic
(unpredictable) and the linear versus nonlinear signal modality
for stock indices. Finally, the intrinsic phase synchrony (IPS)
is used for the quantication of inter-dependencies during -
nancial crises, as nancial systems often exhibit high levels of
systemic risk, that is, they are contagious and, to an extent,
dependent on one another.

It is almost self-evident that nancial markets exhibit high
structural complexity which in turn can be quantied through
entropy, for example, using the multivariate multiscale sample
entropy (MMSE) [11], [23] algorithm. This approach examines
long-term correlations of both the trend and the detrended data.
For enhanced resolution, we introduce a novel MA-MSE al-
gorithm, described in Section III-B. Also, prior to modelling
nancial indices, it is a prerequisite to establish the ground truth
for the linear versus nonlinear and deterministic versus stochas-
tic nature of the data, referred to as signal modality analysis. To
this end, we employ nonparametric analyses using the methods
of recurrence plots (RPs) [24] and DVV [25], which examine the
nature of the underlying generating mechanisms [26], a subject
of Section III-C and Section III-D.

We also examine the degree of synchrony between nancial
indices and establish the extent to which IPS [27] can be used to
quantify synchronous behaviournancial contagion leading
to systemic riskamong multiple stock indices related to the
same sector, as elaborated in Section III-E.

In the analysis, we consider four major stock indices which
indicate the state of economy of the US[1]: (i) Dow Jones Indus-
trial Average (DJIA), (ii) NASDAQ Composite, (iii) Standard
& Poors 500 (S&P 500), and (iv) Russell 2000. The DJIA com-
prises 30 of the largest companies in the US across a range of
industries except for transport and utilities; NASDAQ is an in-
dicator of the performance of stocks in technology and of the
growth in companies; S&P 500 consists of 500 large companies
from a vast number of industries, each having market capital-
isation of more than $5 billion; and Russell 2000 comprises a
small-cap segment of the US equity market. We also consider
four nancial markets outside the US in order to assess the per-
formance of the ALIS: (i) Financial Times Stock Exchange 100
(FTSE 100), (ii) Cotation Assistee en Continu 40 (CAC 40), (iii
and iv) foreign exchange (Forex) markets for the EUR/GBP and
GBP/JPY. The FTSE 100 is a share index of the 100 companies
listed on the London Stock Exchange, the CAC 40 represents

the 40 most signicant values among the highest 100 market
capitalisation of the Euronext Paris (Paris stock exchange).

It is arguable whether increased local variances may already
signify nancial crises, without assistance of sophisticated
numerical methods. The studied nonparametric methods, how-
ever, are independent of signal variance which being only a 2nd
order moment may not effectively reveal major nancial crises.
Indeed, we show how such crises can be precisely determined
through changes in the intrinsic characteristics of nancial
data, such as their determinism, linearity, and complexity. The
purpose of this study is therefore to quantify these time-varying
characteristics in order to simultaneously characterise, in a full
multivariate way, the nancial stress through the complexity-
loss hypothesis (systems under stress exhibit greater regularity
and less freedom.) [28][30] and systemic risk (the markets are
contagious and behave in the same way during nancial crises).
This is achieved by examining in stock trends intrinsic and
inter-channel dependencies together with their nonlinear and
stochastic properties. The detrended stock indices (the rate of
change) of the market indices over the last 25 years (between 1st
January 1991 and 31st August 2015) were analysed using the
following nonparametric methods: (i) MMSE, (ii) MA-MSE,
(iii) RQA, (iv) DVV, (v) ALIS, and (vi) IPS. Methods (ii),
(v), and (vi) are novel and are derived specically for nancial
data. The analysis is veried over several case studies which
support the complexity-loss hypothesis for nancial markets, a
robust framework to understand nancial stress, and is expected
to be benecial to those interested in middle- and long-term
investments.

III. ALGORITHM AND BACKGROUND

We shall rst briey describe the algorithms used in this study.

A. MA Algorithm for the Multivariate Case

This standard approach considers a multivariate signal
xorg,k ,i, k = 1, 2, . . . , p, i = 1, . . . , N, with p being the num-
ber of data channels,  time lag, and N the total number of
sample points. The MA lter removes the trend, sk ,j , from the
original xorg,k ,i, using the following functional form

k ,j =
s

1


j+/21(cid:2)

i=j/21

xorg,k ,i, 1  j  N   + 1,

(1)

where  is a pre-dened scale factor (data window size). The
detrended data, zk ,j , is then obtained as

k ,j = xorg,k ,i  s
z
k ,j ,

i = 1, 2, . . . , N  1.

(2)

Observe that long window sizes will remove short trends.

B. Multivariate Multiscale Sample Entropy (MMSE) &
Moving-Average Multivariate Sample Entropy (MA-MSE)

The sample entropy (SampEn) method calculates empirical
estimates of entropy [31] based on the probability of similarity
between the delay vectors (patterns) in data. The SampEn is a
single-scale measure, however, the interpretation of complexity
estimated via entropy requires multiple scales. To this end,
the multiscale sample entropy (MSE) algorithm [32] employs

HEMAKOM et al.: FINANCIAL STRESS THROUGH COMPLEXITY SCIENCE

1115

pre-determined scales, constructed using the coarse graining
process (CGP). Such scales do not match intrinsic properties in
the data, and in addition the number of data points for a given
scale, , N = N
 , decreases linearly in the scale factor. For
better resolution, the modied multiscale entropy (Mod-MSE)
[33] algorithm replaces GCP by a MA scale denition process.
Both the MSE and the Mod-MSE are, however, univariate
algorithms, not capable of accounting for cross-channel
dependencies. To cater for multivariate cases, the multivariate
MSE (MMSE) [11], [23], reveals both the intrinsic- and
cross-complexities through a multivariate embedding process.
We here introduce its variate, termed MA-MSE, to quantify
multivariate complexity of both the trend and the detrended
data, a procedure referred to as the MA-MSE, outlined in
Algorithm 1. By virtue of MA-MSE, pre-dened and physically
meaningful scales are generated to match periods of interest
(nance-specic scales) in nancial data, such as short-term
trading (15 days), and short- (less than a month), medium-
(13 months) and long-term (over a year) trends [6].

Within either the MMSE or the MA-MSE, rst the embedding
dimension m and time lag  of each variate are calculated to
construct a composite multivariate delay vector, given by

Xm (i) = [x1,i, x1,i+ 1 , . . . , x1,i+(m 1 1) 1 ,

x2,i, x2,i+ 2 , . . . , x2,i+(m 2 1) 2 , . . . ,
xp,i, xp,i+ p , . . . , xp,i+(m p 1) p ],

(3)
where M = [m1, m2, . . . , mp]  Rp is the embedding dimen-
sion vector,  = [1, 2, . . . , p] denotes the time lag vector, p is
the number of variates, and Xm (i)  Rm .
The CGP within the MMSE creates scale factors by averaging
the adjacent sample points within non-overlapping windows of
increasing length  (scale factor). The resulting data, denoted
by y

k ,j , represent a coarse-grained scale  and is obtained as

k ,j =
y

1


j (cid:2)

i=(j1)+1

xk ,i, 1  j  N



.

(4)

The proposed MA-MSE replaces the CGP by MA-based scale
k ,j , and the detrended data,
k ,j ] and are used as pre-

generation, whereby both the trend, s
z
k ,j , z
k ,j , are combined as w
dened scales (input) for the algorithm.

k ,j = [s

Algorithm 1: Multivariate multiscale sample entropy
(MMSE) & Moving-average multivariate sample entropy
(MA-MSE).
For each scale: y

k ,j (MMSE), or w

k ,j (MA-MSE):

1) Construct a composite delay vector based on the scale

k ,j (MMSE) or w
y

k ,j (MA-MSE).

2) Search for similar patterns in every data channel of the

composite delay vector. If the difference in the pair-
wise distance is less than or equal to the dened
tolerance ||Xm (i)  Xm (j)||  r, j (cid:4)= i, the event of
similarity, denoted by Pm , is counted.
1
N

Pm , where N is
the total number of searches in composite delay vector.

3) Calculate the probability Bm (r) =

4) Repeat Steps 1 to 3 for the (m + 1)-dimensional

composite delay vector.

5) Calculate the MMSE or the MA-MSE using

SampEn(m, , r) =  ln

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

Bm +1r
Bm r

(6)

Algorithm 2: Recurrence quantication analysis (RQA).
Input: Discrete time series x(n).

1) Given the optimal embedding parameters, m and  ,

generate the delay vectors (DVs), as in Eq. (5).
2) Compute the RPs matrix, which summarises all
pairwise Euclidean distances between DVs, as

(cid:5)
  ||X(i)  X(j)||(cid:6)
RPi,j =

, i, j = 1, . . . , Ns ,

(7)

where Ns is the number of considered states in X,
 a threshold distance (60% of the mean Euclidean
distance of the DVs), ||  || the Euclidean distance,
and () the Heaviside function.

3) The percentage of recurrence points which form

diagonal lines measures the degree of predictability,
and is computed as:

DET =

,

(8)

(cid:7)
j=jm i n j  P (j)
N s
(cid:7)
j=1 j  P (j)

N s

Before computing the MMSE and the MA-MSE, a tolerance
parameter, r, is dened and is used to search for similar patterns
(delay vectors) by comparing the scalar distance between all
pairs of delay vectors in Eq. (3), but without self-comparison.
If the difference in the distance of a pair of delay vectors is less
than r, the event of a similar pattern has occurred.

C. Recurrence Quantication Analysis (RQA)

The RP method [24], outlined in Algorithm 2, was introduced
to visualise the dynamics of phase space trajectories. Using the
Takens embedding theorem [34], for a given univariate time
series x(n), the phase space can be reconstructed by embedding
the time series as follows:

Xm , (i) = [xi, xi+ , . . . , xi+(m1) ]

i = 1, . . . , N  (m  1),

(5)

where P (j) is the number of diagonal lines of length
j, and jmin the minimum number of points to be
considered as a diagonal line (in this work, jmin = 2).

where N is the total number of points,  the delay between
consecutive points of the time series, and m the embedding
dimension. A common approach to determining the time lag 
is based on the mutual information algorithm [35], while the
selection of the minimum embedding dimension m is based on
the false nearest neighbours method [36]. A joint calculation of
the optimal  and m has been proposed in [37].

The quantication of the number and duration of the re-
currences allows us to study the degree of determinism [38],
whereas the length of a diagonal line in RP reects the num-
ber of consecutive states in which the two trajectory segments
exhibit similar evolution.

1116

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, SEPTEMBER 2016

Algorithm 3: Delay vector variance (DVV).

1) Given the optimal embedding parameters, m and  ,

generate the delay vectors (DVs) based on
Eq. (5). Every DV , X(i), has a corresponding target,
xi+(m1) +1.

2) The mean, d, and the standard deviation, d, are

computed over all pairwise Euclidean distances
between DVs, ||X(i)  X(j)||(i (cid:4)= j).
3) The sets k (rd) are generated such that
k (rd) = {x(i)||x(k)  x(i)||  rd}, i.e., sets which
consist of all DVs that lie closer to x(k) than a certain
distance rd, taken from the interval
[max{0, d  nd d}], e.g., Ntv uniformly spaced
distances, where nd is a parameter which controls the
span over which the DVV analysis is performed.

4) For every set k (rd), the variance of the

corresponding targets, 2
k (rd), is computed. The
average over all sets k (rd), normalised by the
variance of the time series, k , yields the target
variance, 

2(rd):
2 =



(cid:7)

1
N

k (rd)

N

k=1 2
2
x

,

(9)

where N denotes the total number of sets k (rd).

5: Repeat Steps 1 to 4 for the Ns surrogates.

A time series x(n) is considered deterministic if its trajectory
in the phase space is smooth and can be modelled as a continuous
function. This results in an RP matrix where almost every state is
recurrent and forms long diagonal lines, where the DET value is
close to unity. On the other hand, if a time series is stochastic, the
DET values are close to zero. The intermediate case corresponds
to a signal which comprises both deterministic and stochastic
components.

D. Delay Vector Variance (DVV)

The DVV method [25] is a phase space technique which
examines the deterministic versus stochastic nature of a time
series, and when combined with the method of surrogate data
[25], it also provides information about its linear versus non-
linear behaviour. Most statistical signal nonlinearity analyses,
including the surrogate data method, are based on the Monte-
Carlo approach [39], whereby an ensemble of surrogate data is
constructed to represent linearised versions of the original data.
A statistical measure (test statistics) is then computed for both
the original time series and the surrogates; if these are signi-
cantly different, the data at hand are deemed not to be generated
by a linear process.

The standard denition of a linear signal is that it is gener-
ated by a Gaussian linear stochastic process. Based on this null
hypothesis, constrained surrogates are commonly generated by
the iterative amplitude adjusted Fourier transform (iAAFT) [40],
and its rened version, the maximal overlap discrete wavelet
transform (MODWT), where the original iAAFT-procedure is
applied to each set of wavelet coefcients (WiAAFT). The
WiAAFT retains not only the signal distribution and amplitude
spectrum of the original time series but also the local mean and

the variance of the original time series [41]. The DVV method
is summarised in Algorithm 3.

Due to the standardisation of the intervals of rd, the deter-
minism/nonlinearity analysis by DVV can be illustrated in a
scatter diagram where the horizontal axis corresponds to mea-
sured variances of the original signal, and the vertical axis to
that of the average of the surrogates. If the surrogates exhibit
similar behaviour to the original signal, the DVV graph will lie
on the bisector line and the original signal is considered to be
linear; any deviation from the bisector line indicates a nonlinear
signal. Moreover, the minimum target variance for the original
signal is a measure of the amount of uncertainty present in the
time series.

E. Intrinsic Phase Synchrony (IPS)

The degree of phase synchronisation between data channels
can be measured through phase synchrony, which quanties only
the phase relationship between two signals without accounting
for amplitude information, and is dened in terms of the devia-
tion from perfect synchrony via the phase synchronisation index
(PSI).

The IPS was originally proposed in the so called intrinsic
multiscale analysis framework in [27] and generalises standard
phase synchrony by equipping it with the ability to operate at
the intrinsic scale level. It employs multivariate empirical mode
decomposition (MEMD) [42] to decompose a given multivariate
signal into its narrowband intrinsic oscillations (IMFs), which
makes it possible to quantify the temporal locking of the phase
information in IMFs using the standard phase synchronisation
index (PSI), as outlined in Algorithm 4.

Financial time series contain different degrees of volatility,
or in other words power imbalances among the signal channels;
therefore in the intrinsic multiscale analysis we use the noise-
assisted adaptive-projection intrinsically-transformed MEMD
(NA-APIT-MEMD) which accounts for the different dynamics
in multivariate data (see [43] for more detail). By virtue of
NA-APIT-MEMD, these intrinsic scales physically represent
short-term trading, and short-, medium-, and long-term trends.
Standard phase synchrony can then be employed to characterise
scale-wise dependencies in stock indices.

F. Assessment of Latent Index of Stress (ALIS)

We shall now introduce the ALIS to quantify stress level of
a nancial organism by considering the detrended data, zk ,j ,
as the input, followed by aggregating the normalised nancial
time series of the low (00.0042 Hz, LF) and high (0.0167
0.2 Hz, HF) frequency bands. The LF band was chosen so as
to correspond to long-term trends (over a year), while the HF
band is related to short-term trading (5 days), short-term trends
(less than a month) and medium-term trends (3 months). Given
the sampling frequency, fs, of 1 Hz (the close stock value for
each day), and f = fs
, where f is the frequency and N0 the
N 0
number of data points, a simple period-frequency conversion
maps the periods of one year (240 sample points), 3 months (60
sample points), and 5 days (5 sample points) to the correspond-
240 = 0.0042 Hz),
ing frequencies of 0.0042 Hz (f = fs
N 0
0.0167 Hz (f = fs
60 = 0.0167 Hz) and 0.2 Hz (f =
N 0
5 = 0.2 Hz) in detrended nancial time series. These
fs
N 0

= 1

= 1

= 1

HEMAKOM et al.: FINANCIAL STRESS THROUGH COMPLEXITY SCIENCE

1117

Algorithm 4: Intrinsic phase synchrony (IPS).
Input: Discrete time series x1(n), x2(n).

1) Obtain IMFs via the NA-APIT-MEMD, c1,i and c2,i,

i = 1, . . . , M.

2) Calculate the instantaneous phases for the IMFs and

the phase difference i(n).

3) Phase synchrony is then dened in terms of the
deviation from perfect synchrony via the phase
synchronisation index (PSI) [44], given by

(n) = Smax  S

Smax

,

(10)

2 ) within a window of length W , M

M

m =1 pm ln pm is the Shannon entropy

where S =  (cid:7)
of the distribution of phase differences
i(n  W
2 : n + W
is the number of bins within the distribution of phase
differences, and pm is the probability of
i(n  W
maximum entropy Smax is given by

2 : n + W
Smax = 0.626 + 0.4 ln(W  1).

2 ) within the mth bin. The

(11)

Algorithm 5: Assessment of Latent Index of Stress (ALIS).
Input: Generate the detrended data, zk ,j , using the MA
algorithm with a pre-dened scale factor (window size) of
the length 1 year.

1) Construct the two time series corresponding to the LF

and HF frequency bands, LF (d) and HF (d), where
symbol d denotes a month.

2) Normalise the LF and HF time series by subtracting
the mean and dividing by standard deviation in order
to alleviate the problem of scaling.

3) Remove the offset in both the LF (d) and HF (d).
4) The ALIS is given by ALIS(d) = LF (d) + HF (d).
5) Use the median in the ALIS(d) as a threshold for

stress in the market.

frequencies were used as cut-off frequencies for the LF and
HF bands. A threshold which determines whether the market is
judged stressed or normal is derived based on the median, as
summarised in Algorithm 5.

IV. ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

We applied our methodology to four stock market indices
which represent the US economy over the last 25 years, be-
tween 1st January 1991 and 31st August 2015. Five consecutive
periods of different natures were identied, based on our inter-
pretation of key geopolitical and socio-economic events which
affected the US and world economies [1], as follows:

1) Period 1: 1-JAN-1991 to 31-DEC-1999. Economic boom,
followed the dot-com boom from 1997 to December
1999.

2) Period 2: 1-JAN-2000 to 31-DEC-2003. Uncertainty, high
volatility, and Internet bubble burst; the economy crisis
further deteriorated due to the 9/11 terrorist attack and its
aftermaths.

3) Period 3: 1-JAN-2004 to 31-DEC-2007. Recovery due to

huge investment in undervalued stocks.

4) Period 4: 1-JAN-2008 to 31-DEC-2011. Sub-prime mort-

gage and debt crises.

5) Period 5: 1-JAN-2012 to 31-AUG-2015. Weak growth and
recovery owing to the uncertainty in scal policy (scal
cliff), increases in tax, and a slowdown in the housing
sector.

A. Analytical Framework

Fig. 1 shows the framework of the data analysis using the al-
gorithms presented in Section III. In the MA-MSE analysis, MA
lters with different window sizes, , were rst employed in or-
der both to extract the trends in the four stocks (as a multivariate
variable) and to produce the detrended data. The multivariate
complexities of both the trends and the detrended data were
then estimated using multivariate SE given in Algorithm 1. The
detrended data of univariate variables of the four stocks were
then generated using an MA lter with the window size, , of
5 days for the RQA and DVV analyses, given in Algorithms 2
and 3, so as to quantify the determinism and linearity. An MA
lter with the window size, , of 1 year was next used to extract
univariate detrended data of the four stocks for the ALIS index.
This algorithm, given in Algorithm 5, was employed in order to
determine the stress level for each stock index. Finally, depen-
dencies between the stock indices were estimated using the IPS
outlined in Algorithm 4.

B. MA Algorithm

For the MA-MSE analysis, six scale factors of 5 days (short-
term trading), 10 day, 1 month (short-term trends), 2 months,
3 months (medium-term trends) and 1 year (long-term trends)
were employed in the MA algorithm, in order to obtain trends
within the original daily-adjusted closing prices of the four -
nancial indices and the detrended data. For the RQA and DVV
analyses, a scale factor of 5 days was used in the MA algorithm,
while for the ALIS index, a scale factor of 1 year was used in the
MA algorithm. The trends and the detrended data of the DJIA,
NASDAQ, Russell 2000, and S&P 500 were estimated using a
scale factor of 5 days, and the results are shown in Fig. 2(a)(d).

C. Multivariate Multiscale Sample Entropy &
Moving-Average Multivariate Sample Entropy

Financial data were considered as an output of a low noise
system. This is natural as they represent actual values of the
stock indices, and therefore m = 2 was used. A unit time lag
 = 1 was chosen as there exist short-term correlations in the
sliding windows.1 Four-year sliding windows with 3 years and
11 months overlap (1 month increment) were used.

1The appropriate selection of m and  relies on the underlying dynamics of
a given multivariate time series. Pincus suggested that the values m = 2 or 3
[45] are sufcient for a low-dimensional system under low noise. Kaffashi et al.
[46] recommended that  = 1 is sufcient for the estimation of complexity of
a system which has a relatively short-term correlation, and the tolerance r is
typically set between 1020% of the standard deviation (SD) for robustness
to noise. We have therefore selected the middle value, 15% of the SD, for the
MMSE and MA-MSE algorithms.

1118

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, SEPTEMBER 2016

Fig. 1. Analytical framework. Framework of the data analysis using MA-MSE, RQA, DVV, ALIS, and IPS.

Fig. 2.
Stock market indices (DJIA, NASDAQ, Russell 2000 and S&P 500) and their detrended versions. Upper panels: Original data and their trends for a
5-day scale. Lower panels: Detrended data. (a) The DJIA over 19912015. (b) The NASDAQ over 19912015. (c) The Russell 2000 over 19912015. (d) The S&P
500 over 19912015.

HEMAKOM et al.: FINANCIAL STRESS THROUGH COMPLEXITY SCIENCE

1119

more regularitywere observed. These ndings are supported
by the RQA analysis in Section IV-D. Note that while the occur-
rences of the crises were detected using the MA-MSE applied to
the nancial trends, stress in the nancial markets was observed
using the MA-MSE applied to the detrended data.

D. Recurrence Quantication Analysis

Fig. 5 shows the degree of determinism of the detrended data
of individual stock indices, calculated by applying the RQA to
detrended data. A 4-year sliding windows with 3 years and 11
months overlap (1 month increment), was used in order to cap-
ture economic changes over a small number of economic cycles.
From 1994 to 1996 (period of economic stability), the RQA in-
dicated very low determinismhigh uncertaintyfor all the
indices. This conforms with the EMH, which states that during
normal situations stock prices behave in a random (uncertain)
way.

During the dot-com bubble between 1997 and 2000, ex-
ceptional levels of growth in technological companies were re-
ected in an increase in the levels of determinism of the NAS-
DAQ (stock market for technological companies), together with
the Russell 2000. Both the growth in the stock indices and the
degrees of determinism of both the NASDAQ and the Russell
2000 peaked simultaneously in 2000. This also conforms with
the EMH hypothesis, whereby speculative economic bubbles are
reected in overestimation in stock priceshigh determinism
particularly in the DJIA and the S&P.

The degrees of determinism in all the four indices dropped
again in 2000, for the duration of the Internet bubble burst, until
2004. Observe that during this crisis the DJIA and the S&P500
were very uncertain (low determinism). The NASDAQ and the
Russell 2000 also showed signicant decrease in determinism,
with a short boost of NASDAQ by the Internet bubble burst in
2003.

During the economic recovery period from 2004 to 2008, the
degrees of determinism of all the four indices were very low
(lower than 0.1)low determinism in normal situations. The
investors began to buy undervalued stocks which in turn drove
sub-prime mortgage crisis in the mid-2008, as indicated by an
increase in determinism for the DJIA and the S&P 500high
determinism during speculative economic bubbles. The NAS-
DAQ and Russell 2000 were less affected, as housing investment
bear no relevance for these indices. Finally, from 2011 to date
the markets weakly recovered, and the degrees of determinism
were as low as those in the healthy periods (20042008)low
determinism in normal situations.

Observe that both markets for large business companies
(DJIA and S&P 500) exhibited pronounced synchrony within
the considered 25 years, and the degrees of determinism of the
four nancial indices were inversely related to the multivariate
complexity of the detrended data quantied by the MA-MSE
(see Fig. 4).

E. Delay Vector Variance

The DVV method examined linearity and uncertainty in the
detrended data. Fig. 6 analyses the four detrended indices based
on 99 surrogates generated by the WiAAFT, where the cho-
sen parameters were: the maximum span nd = 3, subset size

Fig. 3.
Structural complexity of trends in compound stock indices. The MA-
MSE values which represent the structural complexity for the trends of the four
nancial indices in different economic periods. The trends were generated using
the MA algorithm with six pre-dened scale factors (5 days, 10 days, 1 month,
2 months, 3 months and 1 year).

The long- and short-term correlations in data were found via
the MA lter with different pre-dened scale factors, . We con-
sidered six pre-dened scale factors which match the periods of
interest in nancial data (short-term trading, short-, medium-,
and long-term trends), for which the scale factors were respec-
tively 5 days (5 sample points), 10 days (10 sample points),
1 month (20 sample points), 2 months (40 sample points), 3
months (60 sample points), and 1 year (240 sample points).

Fig. 3 shows the multivariate complexity of the trends (price
moving average) estimated using the MA-MSE with the six
pre-dened scale factors. Observe that in each economic period
the multivariate complexities in all the scales exhibited similar
sample entropy values. The MA-MSE suggested substantially
higher multivariate complexity during the dot-com bubble and
the Internet bubble burst, the periods of uncertainty and high
volatility. During the sub-prime mortgage crisis, the MA-MSE
revealed higher entropy values than the normal periods  the
economic-boom, economic-recovery, and weak-growth periods.
Note that high multivariate complexities of the trends estimated
using the MA-MSE revealed the presence of the crises, as -
nancial trends show the tendencies of the markets to change in
a particular way over time [3].

The multivariate complexities of the original data of the four
nancial indices and the trends were estimated respectively us-
ing the MMSE and the MA-MSE, and are shown in Figs. 9 and
10. Observe that the multivariate complexity quantied using
the MA-MSE had no aliasing at large scales, a major improve-
ment of the MA-MSE in scale generation.

Fig. 4 validates our complexity-loss hypothesis by exam-
ining the multivariate complexity of the detrended data (rate
of change) estimated using the MA-MSE with six pre-dened
scales. It suggests high complexity between 2000 and 2004, the
period of uncertainty and high volatility. Observe in both the
gures a high variation in complexity among different scales
from 2004 to 2008 (the economic recovery period)highly
pronounced in the 5-day pre-dened scale, which indicates en-
hanced short-term dependencies in data. Also, during the dot-
com bubble between 1997 and 2000, long-term correlations

1120

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, SEPTEMBER 2016

Fig. 4.
Structural complexity of detrended compound stock indices. The MA-MSE values which represent the structural complexity for the detrended data of
the four nancial indices. These values were estimated using 4-year sliding windows with 3 years and 11 months overlap (1 month increment). The trends were
generated using the MA algorithm with six pre-dened scale factors (5 days, 10 days, 1 month, 2 months, 3 months and 1 year).

Fig. 5. Determinism in individual stock indices estimated using RQA. The degree of determinism for the 5-day MA detrended nancial data of the DJIA (solid
thick line), the NASDAQ (broken thin line), the Russel 2000 (solid thin line), and the S&P 500 (broken thick line). The degrees were estimated using the RQA.
Four-year sliding windows with 3 years and 11 months overlap (1 month increment) were employed in the analysis using the embedding parameters obtained via
mutual information ( ) and Caos method (m).

Nsub = 200 points, and 20 uniformly spaced distances in the
horizontal axes. A variance measurement was considered valid
if the set of points was within a certain Euclidean distance, rd,
and contained at least 30 delay vectors (DVs). Based on Fig. 6,
ve sub-periods of two-year length, with both low and high
degrees of determinism, were chosen for the analysis and the
local predictability of the original signals and the surrogates was
assessed in order to detect the presence of nonlinearity.

Fig. 6(a) shows that between 1993 and 1995 (period of eco-
nomic stability) the four indices exhibited strictly random and
linear behaviour. In Fig. 6(b), each of the four indices shows
clear deviations from the bisector lines in the period 1998
2000, indicating the presence of nonlinear dynamics during the
dot-com bubble. Between 2005 and 2007 (see Fig. 6(c)), the
economy recovered (low determinism in Fig. 5), as exempli-
ed by a relative linearity and low predictability (lower distance
of DVV plots from the vertical axis) except for the NASDAQ
which still suffered from the consequences of technological

boom in the late 1990s. The sub-prime mortgage crisis be-
tween 2008 and 2010 and global recession were reected in the
deterministic and nonlinear behaviour of nancial data (see
Fig. 6(d)), as indicated by a large deviation from the bisector
line. Finally, recent weak growth in the economy was reected
in random and linear behaviour of the indices (see Fig. 6(e)),
similar to the rst and third sub-periods.

The DVV analysis therefore complements the RQA analysis
and suggests that during nancially stable periods, stock market
indices exhibit random and linear behaviour, while any abnor-
mal events (bubbles or crises) cause a more predictable (less
stochastic) and nonlinear behaviour.

F. Intrinsic Phase Synchrony

Multivariate data exhibit inter-channel dependencies, and in
order to assess synchronous behaviour among stock indices in
different economic periods in a full multivariate way, we anal-
ysed the synchrony between stock indices using IPS. The four

HEMAKOM et al.: FINANCIAL STRESS THROUGH COMPLEXITY SCIENCE

1121

Fig. 6. Nonlinearity in individual stock indices. The DVV analysis with 99 WiAAFT surrogates was performed on the four stock market indices using the
embedding parameters obtained via the mutual information algorithm ( ) and Caos method (m). First row: the DJIA. Second row: the NASDAQ. Third row: the
S&P 500. Fourth row: Russell 2000. The columns correspond to the subperiods: (a) 19931995, (b) 19982000, (c) 20052007, (d) 20082010, and (e) 20132015.

nancial time series were combined into a single quadrivariate
signal, for which the intrinsic, data-adaptive, scales were de-
termined using the NA-APIT-MEMD with ten adjacent noise
channels, and the  value for the NA-APIT-MEMD was 1,
to cater for power imbalances among the four data channels
(see [43] for more detail). The PSIs between pairs of the data
channels at every IMF index were then calculated from 50 re-
alisations of NA-APIT-MEMD, and the condence intervals at
each IMF index were calculated by benchmarking against the
PSIs between pairs of noise channels (no synchrony). The PSI
values between the nancial time series within these condence
intervals were adjudged spurious.

Fig. 7 shows the PSI values between all pairs of stock indices
at different IMF indices, estimated from 50 realisations of NA-
APIT-MEMD. Observe that PSI values at IMF indices 6 and 7,
which represent the periods of 1 and 2 years (long-term trends),
in all the ve periods were always higher than 0.8, indicating

that all the stock indices exhibited prominent synchrony in their
long-term trends.

In all the ve periods, the DJIA and the S&P 500 were also
highly synchronised in: (i) short-term trading (periods of 15
days, represented by IMFs 12); (ii) short-term trends (peri-
ods of less than a month, represented by IMFs 34); and (iii)
medium-term trends (periods of 13 months, represented by
IMF 5). This nding is also supported by Fig. 2(a) and (d), and
the RQA analysis.

Notice from Fig. 7 that all the PSI values at IMFs 1-2 (short-
term trading) during the dot-com bubble (19972000, the rst
period) and the Internet bubble burst (20002004, the second
period) (except for the DJIA - S&P 500) were relatively low
(lower than 0.6). These periods are exemplied by: (i) rela-
tively low short-term dependencies (see Fig. 4), (ii) high vari-
ations in the degree of determinism (see Figs. 5 and 6(b)),
and (iii) relatively high levels of stress of the four nancial

1122

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, SEPTEMBER 2016

Fig. 7.
Intrinsic synchrony between individual stock indices. The graphs show phase synchrony (PSI) between stock indices across different time scales (IMF
index) for the ve periods considered (black line), and the upper- and lower-bounds of condence intervals (red lines). The IMFs [1, 2], [3, 4], 5, 6, 7 correspond
respectively to the time scales of 15 days, 1 month, 13 months, 1 year, and 2 years. (a) DJIA against NASDAQ. (b) DJIA against Russell 2000. (c) DJIA against
S&P 500. (d) NASDAQ against Russell 2000. (e) NASDAQ against S&P 500. (f) Russell 2000 against S&P 500. The PSI values outside the condence intervals
were statistically relevant estimates of synchronisation. The PSI values at IMF index 7 of the fth period could not be estimated as they were monotonic functions.

indices as indicated by ALIS in the next section (see Fig. 8(a)
and (d)).

However, during the third period (20042007), with low
variations in the determinism and low levels of stress (see
Section IV-G), all of the stock pairs exhibited higher synchrony
in short-term trading (IMFs 1-2) (all the PSI values were higher
than 0.6). This indicates pronounced short-term dependencies,
which were also detected using the MA-MSE analysis (see
Fig. 4).

Observe that during the sub-prime mortgage crisis (2008
2011, the fourth period) all the PSI values (except for the DJIA
- S&P 500) were, on the average, higher than those for the
recovery and weak growth periods (the third and fth periods,
20042007 and 20122015). This also indicates the presence of
systemic risk, where the markets are contagious and behave in
the same way during the nancial crisis.

G. Assessment of Latent Index of Stress

The wellbeing of the economic organism was next exam-
ined through the complexity-loss hypothesis, whereby the low

complexity (high stress level) is indicated by high values of the
proposed ALIS index applied to the detrended data. Four-year
sliding windows with 3 years and 11 months overlap (1 month
increment) were used. Fig. 8(a)(d) show the stress levels for
the DJIA, NASDAQ, Russell 200 and S&P 500. Observe that
the stress levels of the DJIA and the S&P 500 (markets for big
companies) were above the thresholds during the two crises: the
Internet bubble burst and the sub-prime mortgage crisis, where
the NASDAQ (market for IT companies) exhibited substantially
higher level of stress during the dot-com bubble and the Internet
bubble burst. Although the sub-prime mortgage crisis primarily
affected the housing sector and non-IT companies, it also im-
pacted on IT companies, as indicated by an excess stress level
of the NASDAQ in 2011. The Russell 2000 also exhibited high
stress level during the sub-prime mortgage crisis and the re-
cent weak growth period. However, as it comprises a small-cap
segment of the US equity market, it was less affected by the
Internet bubble burst. Observe that both the markets for large
business companies (DJIA and S&P 500) exhibited pronounced
synchrony within the 25 years considered. This nding is also

HEMAKOM et al.: FINANCIAL STRESS THROUGH COMPLEXITY SCIENCE

1123

it exhibits in its responses to major socio-economic and geo-
political events. This has been achieved for four major stock
markets over a period of 25 years. The MSE based multivariate
MA-MSE algorithm has been shown to provide both a composite
estimate of complexity for nancial indices and an estimate
of systemic risk. In addition, the univariate RQA and DVV
approaches have shown that irregularities in the market, such as
the Internet bubble burst, the 9/11 crisis or sub-prime mortgage
crisis, are reected in an increase in the determinism in stock
indices (via RQA), the corresponding reduction in complexity
(via MA-MSE), and increase in nonlinearity (via DVV).

The novel IPS [27] has been employed to quantify scale-wise
couplings in nancial indices, and has indicated pronounced
and physically meaningful synchronisation in the DJIA and the
S&P 500, across the scales. Higher degrees of synchrony have
also been found in short-term dependencies during the periods
with low market stress and low variations in the determinism.
Conversely, the short-term synchrony decreased with high stress
and high variations in the determinism in the markets. Systemic
risk has further been identied by increased levels of average
synchrony between the markets.

Finally, we have introduced a new metric, referred to as the
ALIS, which measures the degree of nancial stress based on
the physically meaningful scales which reect common trad-
ing principles. The ALIS has strongly indicated nancial stress
during the Internet and mortgage bubble crises.

This work has conclusively demonstrated the utility of poste-
rior complexity science approaches in the assessment of nan-
cial stress. Our future studies will focus on incorporating these
approaches within machine learning algorithms in predictive
scenarios.

APPENDIX

A. Multivariate Multiscale Sample Entropy (MMSE) &
Moving-Average Multivariate Sample Entropy (MA-MSE)

As an economic cycle typically lasts for approximately a
year, and in order to capture economic changes over a small
number of economic cycles, 4-year sliding windows with 3
years and 11 months overlap (1 month increment) were applied.
Fig. 9 illustrates the multivariate complexity of the original four
nancial indices estimated using the MMSE. The maximum
duration of coarse graining scales was set to 1 year for which
the six pre-dened scale factors can be selected. However, only
the entropies of ve scales (5 days, 10 days, 1 month, 2 months
and 3 months) could be computed, as the entropy estimated
using the 1-year scale diverged. Notice the effect of aliasing
caused by poor resolution of CGP in the 2- and 3-month scales,
which implies that MMSE may not be suitable for large scales
in nancial data.

Fig. 10 shows the multivariate complexity of the trends (price
moving average) estimated using MA-MSE with the six pre-
dened scale factors. Observe that the multivariate complexities
in all the scales exhibited similar sample entropy values and
no aliasing, except for the 1-year scale which showed a lower
entropy, but similar variation as the other scales. The MA-MSE
suggested high multivariate complexity during 2000 and 2004,
the period of uncertainty and high volatility.

Fig. 8.
Financial stress evolution through the proposed ALIS index. Observe
the perfect match in ALIS for the DJIA, Russell 2000 and S&P 500 for both
the Internet burst and sub-prime mortgage abnormalities. The NASDAQ com-
prises only IT companies and thus reacted more strongly to the Internet bubble
burst and less strongly for the housing crisis. (a) Evolution of ALIS for DJIA.
(b) Evolution of ALIS for NASDAQ. (c) Evolution of ALIS for Russell 2000.
(d) Evolution of ALIS for S&P 500.

supported by the RQA analysis (in Fig. 5) and the IPS analysis
(in Fig. 7).

V. CONCLUSION

We have examined the nancial market from the point of
view of complexity science and have analysed the constraints

1124

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, SEPTEMBER 2016

Fig. 9.
Structural complexity of trends in compound stock indices estimated
using MMSE. The values were estimated using 4-year sliding windows with
3 years and 11 months overlap (1 month increment). The scale factors were
5 days, 10 days, 1 month, 2 months. For the 1-year scale, the entropy values
diverged, and are excluded from the graph.

Structural complexity of trends in compound stock indices estimated
Fig. 10.
using MA-MSE. The values were estimated using 4-year sliding windows with
3 years and 11 months overlap (1 month increment). The trends were generated
using the MA algorithm with six pre-dened scale factors (5 days, 10 days,
1 month, 2 months, 3 months and 1 year).

B. Application of the ALIS to Non-US Financial Markets

The ALIS index was additionally applied to following nan-
cial markets outside the US: (i) Financial Times Stock Exchange
100 (FTSE 100), (ii) Cotation Assistee en Continu 40 (CAC 40),
(iii and iv) foreign exchange (Forex) markets for the EUR/GBP
and GBP/JPY. The data for the Euro was taken from 1-JAN-1999
to 31-Aug-2015, as the electronic version of the Euro has ex-
isted since 1-JAN-1999 although the Euro was ofcially issued
in 2002.

Fig. 11(a)(d) show the ALIS stress levels for the FTSE 100,
CAC 400, and EUR/GBP and GBP/JPY Forex markets. Observe
that the stress levels for the FTSE 100 and CAC 40 (markets for
big companies in the UK and France) were above the threshold
during the two crises. As expected, the EUR/GBP Forex market
was not affected by the Internet bubble burst, but was severely
impacted by the sub-prime mortgage crisis, while the GBP/JPY
Forex market exhibited high stress level during both of the crises.

C. Volatility Index

Volatility index (VIX) is a nancial measure for predicting
fear or stress in stock markets in the future. The classic VIX, so
called historical VIX, is represented by the standard deviation
of the returns (the logarithm of the ratio between the current and
previous prices) over a specic period of time, and is typically
expressed in percentages. A large percentage means the major-
ity of investors realise a signicant risk in the movement of the
market, in other words, it implies high stress in the system. The
VIX was rst estimated for the S&P 100 to observe projected

Financial stress evolution of non-US nancial markets through the
Fig. 11.
ALIS index. (a) The FTSE 100. (b) The CAC 40. (c) EUR/GBP. (d) GBP/JPY.
Observe a perfect match in ALIS for the FTSE 100, CAC 40 and GBP/JPY
exchange rate for both the Internet burst and sub-prime mortgage abnormali-
ties. The ALIS for the EUR/GBP exchange rate indicates that it was severely
impacted by the sub-prime mortage crisis, but not by the Internet burst.

Fig. 12. VIX of the compound stock indices. (a) The FTSE 100. (b) The CAC
40. (c) EUR/GBP. (d) GBP/JPY. The typical monthly and annually periods are
selected as the periods for calculating the VIX, for a fair comparison with the
RQA and ALIS.

fear of investors over the upcoming 30 days. A modern method
for calculating the VIX with capability to monitor volatility in
real time was proposed and performed by Chicago Board Op-
tions Exchange (CBOE) [47]. The CBOE also provides different
names of the VIX for individual stock index, such as VIX (S&P
500), VXN (NASDAQ), VXD (Dow jones) and RVX (Russel
2000).

Fig. 12(a)(d) illustrate the VIX of the individual stock in-
dices monthly and annually. Observe that the highest percentage
point of the VIX occurs in the sub-prime mortgage crisis for the
DJIA, Russel 2000 and S&P 500 (for the NASDAQ, it is the
second highest peaks), which matches the results obtained by
the ALIS index. Comparing with the RQA, however, only the
DJIA and S&P 500 exhibited similar peaks during the crisis. The
second highest percentage of the VIX can be observed during
the Internet bubble burst, while the ALIS and RQA indicate the
most prominent peak of the crisis only in NASDAQ, and less
signicant one in Russel 2000. Considering the trend cycles of

HEMAKOM et al.: FINANCIAL STRESS THROUGH COMPLEXITY SCIENCE

1125

the MA-MSE result, the highest peak is located in the Internet
bubble burst and the second highest one is in the sub-prime
mortgage crisis. This means that the rank orders of the peaks
resulting from the MA-MSE are swapped, compared to the VIX
results. This consequently implies that the MA-MSE could be
affected by only one market (NASDAQ).

Our proposed algorithms exhibit slightly different levels of
magnitudes during the two important crises, as they use de-
trended data with pre-dened scales. Since such data are less
sensitive to immediate changes in the events of the markets,
our proposed algorithms provide more information of particular
trend-cycles for the individual stock indices (via RQA, DVV
and ALIS) and a correlated trend-cycle for the compound stock
indices (via MA-MSE).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank Giuseppe Giovanni Calvi,
Bruno Scalzo Dees, Mosabber Uddin Ahmed, and Alexander
Stott for their help with this study.

REFERENCES

[1] W. Er and D. P. Mandic, Dynamical complexity analysis of multivariate
nancial data, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process.,
2013, pp. 87328736.

[2] N. Amenc, F. Goltz, and V. Le Sourd, Assessing the quality of stock mar-
ket indices. Nice, France, EDHEC Risk & Asset Management Research
Centre Publication, 2007.

[3] G. Fontanills and T. Gentile, Start Market Course. Hoboken, NJ, USA:

Wiley, 2001.

[4] H. S. Dent Jr., The Next Great Bubble Boom: How to Prot from the
Greatest Boom in History: 20062010. New York, NY, USA: Free Press,
2006.

[5] R. Stuteley, Numbers Guide: The Essentials of Business Numeracy, 5th

ed. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2003.

[6] R. D. Edwards, J. Magee, and W. Bassetti, Technical Analysis of Stock

Trends, 9th ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC, 2007.

[7] E. F. Fama, Efcient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical

work, J. Finance, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 383417, 1970.

[8] M. Malik, Heart rate variability: Standards of measurement, physio-
logical interpretation, and clinical use, Eur. Heart J., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 354381, 1996.

[9] H. Selye, Stress and the general adaptation syndrome, Brit. Med. J.,

vol. 1, no. 4667, pp. 13831392, 1950.

[10] P. Lequeux and M. Menon, An eigenvalue approach to risk regimes in
currency markets, J. Derivatives Hedge Funds, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 123
135, 2009.

[11] M. U. Ahmed and D. P. Mandic, Multivariate multiscale entropy: A
tool for complexity analysis of multichannel data, Phys. Rev. E, vol. 84,
no. 6, pp. 061918106191810, 2011.

[12] P. M. Addo, M. Billio, and D. Guegan, Understanding exchange rates
dynamics, CES Working Papers halshs-00803447, ver. 1, pp. 114, 2013.
[13] R. Cardarelli, S. Elekdag, and S. Lall, Financial stress and economic

contractions, J. Financial Stability, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 7897, 2011.

[14] R. Balakrishnan, S. Danninger, S. Elekdag, and I. Tytell, The transmission
of nancial stress from advanced to emerging economics, IMF Working
Paper WP/09/133, pp. 152, 2009.

[15] R. Cardarelli, S. Elekdag, and S. Lall, Financial stress, downturns, and

recoveries, IMF Working Paper WP/09/100, pp. 158, 2009.

[16] K. J. Forbes, Are trade linkages important determinants of country vul-

nerability to crises?, NBER Working Paper 8194, pp. 166, 2001.

[17] G. L. Kaminsky and C. M. Reinhart, The twin crises: The causes of
banking and balance-of-payments problems, Amer. Econ. Rev., vol. 89,
no. 3, pp. 473500, 1999.

[18] C. S. Hakkio and W. R. Keeton, Financial stress: What is it, how can it
be measured, and why does it matter? Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, no. Q II, pp. 550, 2009.

[19] M. Billio, M. Getmansky, A. W. Lo, and L. Pelizzon, Measuring systemic
risk in the nance and insurance sectors, MIT Sloan School Working
Paper 447410, pp. 166, 2010.

[20] M. Kritzman, Y. Li, S. Page, and R. Rigobon, Principal components as a
measure of systemic risk, J. Portfolio Manage., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 116,
2011.

[21] D. Dufe, A 10-by-10-by-10 approach, NBER Working Paper 17281,

pp. 110, 2011.

[22] E. C. Zeeman, Catastrophe theory, Scientic Amer., pp. 6570, 7583,

1976.

[23] M. U. Ahmed and D. P. Mandic, Multivariate multiscale entropy
analysis, IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 9194, Feb.
2012.

[24] J.-P. Eckmann, S. O. Kamphorst, and D. Ruelle, Recurrence plots
of dynamical systems, Europhysics Lett., vol. 4, no. 9. pp. 973977,
1987.

[25] D. P. Mandic, M. Chen, T. Gautama, M. M. Van Hulle, and
A. Constantinides, On the characterization of the deterministic/stochastic
and linear/nonlinear nature of time series, in Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 2008, vol.
464, no. 2093, pp. 11411160.

[26] P. M. Addo, M. Billio, and D. Guegan, Nonlinear dynamics and recur-
rence plots for detecting nancial crisis, North Amer. J. Econ. Finance,
vol. 26, pp. 416435, 2013

[27] D. Looney, A. Hemakom, and D. P. Mandic, Intrinsic multiscale analysis:
A multivariate EMD framework, Proc. Roy. Soc. A, vol. 471, no. 2173,
pp. 20140709-120140709-28, 2015.

[28] A. L. Goldberger, L. A. N. Amaral, J. M. Hausdorff, P. Ch. Ivanov, C.-K.
Peng, and H. E. Stanley, Fractal dynamics in physiology: Alterations with
disease and aging, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 99, pp. 24662472,
2002.

[29] R. Hornero, D. Abasolo, J. Escudero, and C. Gomez, Nonlinear anal-
ysis of electroencephalogram and magnetoencephalogram recordings in
patients with Alzheimers disease, Philosophical Trans. Roy. Soc. A,
vol. 367, no. 1887, pp. 317336, 2009.

[30] T. Takahashi et al., Age-related variation in EEG complexity to photic
stimulation: A multiscale entropy analysis, Clin. Neurophysiology,
vol. 120, no. 3, pp. 47683, 2009.

[31] J. S. Richman and J. R. Moorman, Physiological time-series analysis
using approximate entropy and sample entropy, Amer. J. Physiology -
Heart Circulatory Physiology, vol. 278, no. 6, pp. H2039H2049, 2000.
[32] M. Costa, A. L. Goldberger, and C. K. Peng, Multiscale entropy analysis
of complex physiologic time series, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 89, no. 6,
pp. 068102-1069102-4, 2002.

[33] S.-D. Wu, C.-W. Wu, K.-Y. Lee, and S.-G. Lin, Modied multiscale
entropy for short-term time series, Physica A, vol. 392, no. 2013,
pp. 58655873, 2013.

[34] D. A. Rand and L. S. Young, Dynamical Systems and Turbulence, New

York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 1981.

[35] A. Fraser and H. Swinney, Independent coordinates for strange attractors
from mutual information, Phys. Rev. A, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 11341140,
1986.

[36] L. Cao, Practical method for determining the minimum embedding di-
mension of a scalar time series, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena,
vol. 110, no. 12, pp. 4350, 1997.

[37] T. Gautama, D. P. Mandic, and M. M. Van Hulle, A differential entropy
based method for determining the optimal embedding parameters of a
signal, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acous. Speech Signal Process., 2003,
vol. 6, pp. 2932.

[38] L. L. Trulla, A. Giuliani, J. P. Zbilut, and C. L. Webber Jr, Recurrence
quantication analysis of the logistic equation with transients, Phys. Lett.
A, vol. 223, no. 4, pp. 255260, 1996.

[39] T. Schreiber and A. Schmitz, Surrogate time series, Physica D, vol. 142,

no. 34, pp. 346382, 2000.

[40] T. Schreiber and A. Schmitz, Improved surrogate data for nonlinearity

tests, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 77, no. 4, pp. 635638, 1996.

[41] C. J. Keylock, Improved preservation of autocorrelation structure in sur-
rogate data using an initial wavelet step, Nonlinear Processes Geophysics,
vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 435444, 2008.

[42] N. Rehman and D. P. Mandic, Multivariate empirical mode decomposi-

tion, in Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 2010, vol. 466, no. 2117, pp. 12911302.

[43] A. Hemakom, V. Goverdovsky, D. Looney, and D. P. Mandic, Adaptive-
projection intrinsically transformed multivariate empirical mode de-
composition in cooperative brain-computer interface applications, Phil.
Trans. Roy. Soc. A, vol. 374, no. 2065, pp. 20150199-120150199-15,
2016.

1126

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, SEPTEMBER 2016

[44] P. Tass et al., Detection of n:m phase locking from noisy data: Application
to magnetoencephalography, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 81, no. 15, pp. 3291
3294, 1998.

[45] S. M. Pincus and A. L. Goldberger, Physiological time-series analy-
sis: What does regularity quantify?, Amer. Physiological Soc., vol. 266,
no. 4, pp. H1643H1656, 1994.

[46] F. Kaffashi, R. Foglyano, C. G. Wilson, and K. A. Loparo, The effect of
time delay on approximate & sample entropy calculations, Physica D,
vol. 237, no. 23, pp. 30693074, 2008.
VIX R(cid:6)
the Chicago Board Options Exchange, pp. 123, 2014.

[47] CBOE Execute Success, White paperthe CBOE volatility index
: The powerful and exible trading and risk management tool from

Lisa Aufegger received the M.Sc. degree in psy-
chology from the University of Klagenfurt, Austria,
and the Ph.D. in performance science from the Royal
College of Music, London, U.K. Her research focuses
on designing and validating simulation training and
quantitative metrics to identify signatures of stress
in physiological signals. She is currently a Research
Associate at the Department of Surgery and Cancer,
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, U.K.,
where she continues her research on simulation train-
ing in order to develop strategic leadership skills in

clinical and non-clinical managers in the NHS healthcare system.

Apit Hemakom received the B.Eng. degree in
telecommunications engineering from the King
Mongkuts Institute of Technology Ladkrabang,
Thailand, in 2005, and the M.Eng. degree in com-
puter engineering from Chulalongkorn University,
Thailand, in 2008. Upon obtaining the M.Sc. degree
in biomedical engineering in 2013, from Imperial
College London, U.K., he is currently working to-
ward the Ph.D. degree in adaptive multiscale signal
processing at the same institution. He worked as a
Research Assistant at the National Electronics and
Computer Technology Center, Thailand, from 2008 to 2012, where he was in-
volved in research on assistive and rehabilitative technologies for the hearing
and cognitive impaired. His research interests include biomedical signal pro-
cessing, cooperative brain-computer interface, and rehabilitation technology.

Theerasak Chanwimalueang received the B.Eng.
degree in electrical engineering from the Khon Kaen
University, Thailand, in 2000, and the M.Eng. degree
in biomedical electronics from the King Mongkuts
Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Thailand, in
2007. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree at the Department of Electrical and Elec-
tronic Engineering, Imperial College London, Lon-
don, U.K. Since 2007, he has been a lecturer at the
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of
Engineering, Srinakharinwirot University, Thailand.
His research interests include biomedical signal processing, portable and wear-
able medical devices, and complexity science.

Alicia Carrion received the M.Eng. degree in
telecommunication engineering from the Universit`at
Polit`ecnica de Val`encia (UPV), Spain, in 2011. She
received the M.Sc. degree from Fraunhofer Insti-
tute IOSB, Karlsruhe, Germany. She is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Institute
of Telecommunication and Multimedia Applications,
UPV, Spain. Her research interests include nonlin-
ear signal processing and signal modality charac-
terisation, with applications in submarine acoustics,
ultrasonic testing, and nance.

Anthony G. Constantinides (S68M74SM78
F98) is a Professor of Communications and Signal
Processing at Imperial College, London, U.K. and
former Head of Communications and Signal Pro-
cessing Division of the Department of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering at the same place. He has been
actively involved with research in various aspects of
digital signal processing, digital image processing,
digital lter design, and communications for more
than 45 years. His recent work has been directed
toward the demanding problems arising in nancial
signal processing and he now leads the Financial Signal Processing Lab in the
EEE Department of Imperial College. He has published several books and more
than 400 learned articles in the areas of digital signal processing, image pro-
cessing, and communications, and their many applications. He has been on, and
is currently serving as, a member of many technical program committees of
the IEE and other international conferences. He is the recipient of a number of
awards and honours around the world, including Ofcier, Palmes Academiques,
by the French government. He holds honorary doctorates from European and
Far Eastern Universities. In addition he holds Visiting Professorships, Distin-
guished Lectureships, Fellowships and other honours around the world. He has
served as a Member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Signal Processing
Society, a member of several Technical Committees of the IEEE and the IEE,
and is on the Editorial Boards of many professional journals. He has been on
the Editorial Board of the Proceedings of the Royal Society, Part B. He is a
Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering and of the Institution of Electrical
Engineers, U.K.

Danilo P. Mandic (M99SM03F12) received the
Ph.D. degree in nonlinear adaptive signal process-
ing from Imperial College London, London, U.K., in
1999. He is a Professor of signal processing at Im-
perial College London, London, U.K., where he has
been involved in nonlinear adaptive signal processing
and nonlinear dynamics. He is a Deputy Director of
the Financial Signal Processing Laboratory at Impe-
rial College London. He has been a Guest Professor
with Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Bel-
gium, the Tokyo University of Agriculture and Tech-
nology, Tokyo, Japan, and Westminster University, London, U.K., and a Frontier
Researcher with RIKEN, Wako, Japan. He has two research monographs titled
Recurrent Neural Networks for Prediction: Learning Algorithms, Architectures
and Stability (West Sussex, U.K.: Wiley, 2001) and Complex Valued Nonlinear
Adaptive Filters: Noncircularity, Widely Linear and Neural Models (West Sus-
sex, U.K.: Wiley, 2009), an edited book titled Signal Processing Techniques for
Knowledge Extraction and Information Fusion (New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2008), and more than 200 publications on signal and image processing. He
has been a member of the IEEE Technical Committee on Signal Processing
Theory and Methods, and an Associate Editor of the IEEE Signal Process-
ing Magazine, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS II, the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
NEURAL NETWORKS. He has produced award winning papers and products re-
sulting from his collaboration with the industry.

