IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017

439

Fuzzy Dynamical System Scenario Simulation-Based

Cross-Border Financial Contagion Analysis: A
Perspective From International Capital Flows

Xinxin Xu, Member, IEEE, Ziqiang Zeng, Member, IEEE, Jiuping Xu, Senior Member, IEEE,

and Mengxiang Zhang, Student Member, IEEE

AbstractThis paper focuses on investigating the cross-border
nancial contagion based on a fuzzy dynamical system scenario
simulation from a perspective of analyzing the volatility of interna-
tional capital ows for a panel of 50 countries in emerging markets
and advanced economies from 1980 to 2011. Increasing evidence
has shown that nancial globalization has developed into a complex
nonlinear dynamical system made up of economic subsystems with
extensive nancial connections and linkages. The contagion effects
of the spread of bonanzas in the 50 countries are identied and
analyzed. The HodrickPrescott lter is employed to address the
long-term net capital inow trend. The comovement of nancial
contagion between the source country of nancial turbulence and
the volatility-affected country is described as a fuzzy dynamical
system in which the driving and response systems are coupled. A
fuzzy dynamical system scenario simulation model under a liberal
economy is established by employing nonlinear differential equa-
tions to describe the contagion mechanism and the international
capital ow volatility effects. The model is then extended to a dy-
namical system model with macroeconomic control. The coupling
strength uncertainty is addressed by employing an interval type-2
fuzzy theory method. The properties of the volatility equilibrium
point for the two models are discussed, and the volatility conta-
gion principles based on locally asymptotic stability analysis are
derived to explain the different volatility transmission patterns.

Manuscript received August 1, 2015; revised October 22, 2015 and January
19, 2016; accepted April 20, 2016. Date of publication June 1, 2016; date of
current version March 29, 2017. This work was supported by the Research Foun-
dation of Ministry of Education for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education
of China under Grant 20130181110063, the Youth Program of National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 71501137, the General Program of
China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2015M572470 and Grant
2015M572480, the International Postdoctoral Exchange Fellowship Program
of China Postdoctoral Council under Grant 20150028, the project of Research
Center for System Sciences and Enterprise Development under Grant Xq16B05,
and Sichuan University under Grant skzx2015-sb04 and Grant skqy201647.

X. Xu is with the School of Tourism and Economic Management, Chengdu
University, Chengdu 610106, China, and also with the Uncertainty Decision-
Making Laboratory, Business School, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065,
China (e-mail: xinxinxu@scu.edu.cn).

Z. Zeng is with the Uncertainty Decision-Making Laboratory, Business
School, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China, the School of Tourism and
Economic Management, Chengdu University, Chengdu 610106, China, and
also with the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University
of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 USA (e-mail: zengziqiang@scu.edu.cn).

J. Xu is with the Uncertainty Decision-Making Laboratory, Business School-
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China (e-mail: xujiuping@scu.edu.cn).
M. Zhang is with the Uncertainty Decision-Making Laboratory, Busi-
(e-mail:

ness School, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
zhangmengxiang@stu.scu.edu.cn).

Color versions of one or more of the gures in this paper are available online

at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

Digital Object Identier 10.1109/TFUZZ.2016.2574928

Policy suggestions are given in three situations for providing man-
agerial insights for policymakers and the explorations of response
strategies are also presented. The global nancial crisis in 2008
is used as an experimental study to demonstrate the validity and
effectiveness of the simulation and modeling method.

Index TermsFinancial contagion, fuzzy dynamical systems, in-
ternational capital ows, nonlinear differential equations, volatility
transmission patterns.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE current economic crisis illustrates a critical need for a

new and fundamental understanding of the structure and
dynamics of economic systems [1][3]. The global economic
system, as any other complex systems, reects a dynamic inter-
action of a large number of economic entities [4]. To facilitate
policy designs that reduce conict between individual interests
and global efciency, it is necessary to address the systemic
complexity in the economic systems, in which the dynamics
of nancial contagion is one of the most important problems
attracting attentions.

The term nancial contagion [5] was rarely used before
1995, and then only occasionally appeared in articles discussing
the impact of the Mexican Peso crisis on other countries in
Latin America. The events of the Thailands 1997 devaluation,
the Russias 1998 devaluation, and the global nancial crisis
in 2008 have prompted a number of academic papers, which
have attempted to measure, understand, predict, and prevent
international nancial contagion [6].

Most nancial contagion research has focused on studying
the following three critical aspects [7][9]: 1) Why the con-
tagion spreads and how it can be stopped? 2) How contagion
can be measured? 3) What nancial contagion channels there
are? Studies focused on the rst aspect have concentrated on the
theory and empirics of contagion including the denitions and
effects of contagion, how contagion arises, and the statistical
evidence assessing the existence of contagion [10]. Research
addressing the second aspect has focused on developing general
strategies to measure contagion including probability analysis
[11], cross-market correlations [12], VAR models, latent fac-
tor/GARCH models [13], and extreme value analysis [14]. Bae
et al.s measurement of nancial contagion captured the coinci-
dence of extreme return shocks across countries within a region
and across regions [15]. Research on the third aspect has mod-
eled and tested various contagion channels including real sector
linkages (i.e., trade), nancial market linkages, nancial institu-

1063-6706  2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.

See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

440

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017

tion linkages, and the interaction between nancial institutions
and nancial markets [16]. Although signicant improvements
have been made in addressing the above aspects, much is still
unknown about what makes countries vulnerable to contagion
and through which mechanisms contagion occurs [17].

The cross-border transmission of nancial shocks has been
the subject of rich literature [18]. While a large number of studies
have focused on the strong comovements of asset prices, stock
markets, and foreign exchange markets in the event of nancial
stress, very few have discussed contagion or volatility transmis-
sion patterns in terms of international capital ows [19], [20].
However, there have been some empirical results which indi-
cated the existence of contagion effects in capital ow volatility
[21]. Forbes and Warnocks [11] results also showed that con-
tagion, whether through trade, banking, or geography, was also
associated with stop and retrenchment episodes in international
capital ows.

The high volatility of international capital ows on nancial
markets, and the narrow capacity to handle this volatility by the
markets, makes the beneciary country of the contagion vul-
nerable to excessively large shocks and crises, frequently, and in
a disturbing manner [22]. Developing domestic nancial regula-
tions and planning international nancial architecture to prevent
nancial contagion has become a top priority for both domestic
nancial regulators and the international society. Therefore, un-
derstanding the reasons and mechanisms behind international
nancial contagion can assist policymakers improve the global
nancial regulatory system and thus make it more resistant to
shocks and contagions.

However, existing nancial contagion theories are not suf-
cient to resolve the transmission characteristics, uncertainties,
and nonlinear dynamics in international capital ow volatility.
Therefore, it is necessary to develop methodologies to reveal the
contagion mechanism and the volatility impact of international
capital ows. This paper, based on current improvements in
empirical studies on the transmission of international capital
ow volatility, attempts to develop a fuzzy dynamical system
scenario simulation model in which the source country of
nancial
turbulence is coupled with the volatility-affected
country through different nancial linkages to analyze the
contagion mechanism, the nonlinear dynamics, the coupling
uncertainty, and the impact of the cross-border transmission of
nancial shocks.

The concept of scenario simulation in this paper is dened as
the modeling and simulation of different nancial contagion sit-
uations through the establishment of a fuzzy dynamical system,
the transformation to a crisp equivalent model, model calibration
for initial value conditions and boundary value conditions, the
identication of volatility transmission patterns, scenario analy-
sis, policy suggestions, and an exploration of response strategies.
The nancial volatility contagion analysis has two potential
advantages for policymakers in a real-world situation. First, it
can assist policymakers to understand and identify the volatil-
ity contagion patterns that may occur under a liberal economy,
and second, it can provide valuable information with macroeco-
nomic control simulation analysis for the formulation of appro-
priate response strategies for the establishment of effective mon-
etary and scal policies. Since different types of nancial con-
tagion volatility are ultimately reected as international capital

ow movements, the proposed method in this paper can clearly
reveal the dynamical features and volatility transmission princi-
ples of nancial contagion in a more essential way. Further, the
extension of a dynamical system under a liberal economy to one
with macroeconomic control could be helpful in understanding
the nancial contagion mechanism on a deeper theoretical level
so as to support improvements in nancial policy making.

The outline of this paper is as follows. Section II presents
the key problem description through a discussion of the co-
movements of international capital ow volatility, a contagion
analysis based on capital ow bonanzas, the HodrickPrescott
(HP) lter which addresses long-term net capital inow trends,
and the dynamical system of nancial contagion with interval
type-2 fuzziness. In Section III, a fuzzy dynamical system sce-
nario simulation model under a liberal economy is established
to describe the contagion mechanism and the international
capital ow volatility effects, which is then further extended
to a dynamical system model with macroeconomic control. In
Sections IV and V, the properties of the volatility equilibrium
points in the above two models are discussed and volatility
contagion principles based on the local asymptotic stabil-
ity analysis are derived to explain the different volatility
transmission patterns. Policy suggestions are given in three
situations to provide managerial insights for policymakers and
the exploration of response strategies are also presented in
Section VI. The scenario simulation framework is explained
in Section VII. The global nancial crisis in 2008 is employed
as an experimental study in Section VIII. Section IX ends this
paper with conclusion and proposals for future research.

II. KEY PROBLEM DESCRIPTION

Financial contagion is used to refer to the spread of mostly
negative market disturbances from one country to the other, a
process observed through comovements in exchange rates, stock
prices, sovereign spreads, and capital ows [6]. In this section,
evidence of nancial contagion caused by international capital
ow volatility is rst shown and analyzed. Then, a contagion
analysis based on capital ow bonanzas is presented. The HP
lter is introduced to address long-term net capital inow trends.
Finally, the interval type-2 fuzziness of the coupling strengths
between economies is discussed. The list of symbols used in
this paper is summarized in Table I.
A. Comovements of the International Capital Flow Volatility

There has been signicant evidence of comovements in in-
ternational capital ow volatility. The 1997 East Asian nancial
crisis was linked to volatile short-term capital ows [23]. There
also have been a few tests of capital ow comovements which
have provided insights into the transmission channels of conta-
gion. Lee et al.s empirical results [21], based on a sample of
49 emerging and developing countries from 1980 to 2009, sug-
gested that there were strong and signicant contagion effects in
the volatility of capital ows to individual economies. The mag-
nitudes of contagion was found to vary depending on the type of
capital ows, whether it is foreign direct investment or portfolio
and other investments (mostly bank lending). The ndings also
suggested that the volatility dynamics of gross ows differed
from that of the net ows in that the net inow volatility was
more exposed to intraregional contagion.

XU et al.: FUZZY DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SCENARIO SIMULATION-BASED CROSS-BORDER FINANCIAL CONTAGION ANALYSIS

441

TABLE I

LIST OF NOTATIONS USED IN THIS PAPER

Item

Denition

Item

Denition

a
b

B i (t)

b
k

c l (( ) )
c r (( ) )
Cs v

Cv s

D

d l 
d r 
F IT-2(R)
G D P i (t)
H (( )U
 )

H (( )L
 )

i
k

l  , r 

m 

 v (t)

Inertial coefcient of the volatility-affected country
Inertial coefcient of the source country of nancial turbulence

Indicator function for episode of a bonanza of net
capital inow for country i at time t
Volatility transmission pattern indicator
Left-centroid boundary of membership function of ( )
Right-centroid boundary of membership function of ( )
Fuzzy coupling coefcient for the impact from the
source country of nancial turbulence to the
volatility-affected country
Fuzzy coupling coefcient for the impact from the
volatility-affected country to the source country of
nancial turbulence
A simple connected region in the volatility contagion
trend plane with boundary C
Distance between the left boundary and the mean

Distance between the right boundary and the mean
Set of all IT-2 fuzzy numbers on R
Nominal GDP for country i at time t
Membership value of the element m  in the upper
triangular membership function
Membership value of the element m  in the lower
triangular membership function
Index of country
Synthetic of the inertial coefcients and coupling
coefcients
Left and right boundaries of the preliminary estimated
values of coupling coefcient
Mean of the preliminary estimated values of

coupling coefcient
Macro-economic control input at time t by the
governments and nancial institutes of the volatility-
affected country

B. Contagion Analysis Based on Capital Flow Bonanzas

To examine if the volatility of international capital ows
around the world has comovements during different periods,
data from 50 countries from 1980 to 2011 were collected and
the capital ow uctuations in each country in each year cal-
culated. The country samples included 25 emerging and devel-
oping Asian (EDA) countries and 25 advanced economies for
which data were available. The period samples ranged from
1980 to 2011, a period which covered several severe economic
crises. Fig. 1 shows the number of countries which encountered
international capital ow bonanzas from 1980 to 2011 for the
EDA countries and the advanced economies.

This paper employed the threshold method proposed by Men-
doza and Terrones [24] to identify the capital ow uctuations,
from which several episodes of surges and stops (sharp in-
creases and decreases in net capital inows) were identied. A
bonanza [25] or quantitative surge is dened as an episode in
which the net capital inows to a country increase by more than
a threshold value during a typical business cycle. There are three
steps in identifying a bonanza. The rst step is the measure of
net capital inows. However, because there is no comparability
in the absolute value of net capital inows between different

N F i (t)

t
T

T D ev i (t)
T r en d i (t)

T r en d s (t)

T r en d v (t)

T s0 , T v 0
(x, y )











 s ,  v

 T D e v i ( t )


( )

(x)

(x)

U M F

L M F

(  ) 
(  ) 
 s (t)

Net capital inow for country i at time t
Index of time
Number of observations
Deviation from the historical trend
Historical trend of the net capital inow for
country i at time t
Historical trend of the net capital inow for the
source country of nancial turbulence
Historical trend of the net capital inow for the
volatility-affected country
Initial values of T r en d s (0) and T r en d v (0)
Volatility equilibrium point
Smoothing parameter of the H-P lter
Cluster coefcient
Crisp operator
Ratio of inertial coefcients
Ratio of the crisp fuzzy coupling coefcients

Ratio of the exogenous coefcients between the

volatility-affected country and the source country of
nancial turbulence
Deviation rate of the left boundary and the right
boundary
Exogenous coefcients of the source country of
nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected country
Standard deviation of detrended net capital inows
in country i at time t
IT-2 fuzzy number of coupling coefcient
 -level of the triangular IT-2 fuzzy number of coupling
coefcient
Upper membership function of ( )
Lower membership function of ( )
Macro-economic control input at time t by the
governments and nancial institutes of the source
country of nancial turbulence

countries, the ratio of net capital inows to nominal GDP is
used. The second step is the detrending procedure. Since the
overall volatility of net capital inows can differ across coun-
tries, episodes were identied by sudden and large movements
which were relative to not only each countrys trend, but also
the volatility the country experienced in general. To estimate the
long-term net capital inow trend, the HP lter [26][28], was
employed. The nal step is the setting of the threshold value,
which is dened as the standard deviation of the detrended net
capital inows in country i. Therefore, the episode of a bonanza
in the net capital inow for country i at time t was identied
using the following equation:

1,
0,

if T Devi(t) > T D ev i (t) and N F i (t)
otherwise

G D P i (t) > 1%

(1)

(cid:2)

Bi(t) =

in which an episode of a bonanza of net capital inows for
country i at time t was identied when Bi(t) = 1; T Devi(t) =
G D P i (t)  T rendi(t) is the deviation from the historical trend
N F i (t)
and T D ev i (t) is the standard deviation of detrended net capital
inows in country i at time t; N Fi(t) denotes the net capital
inow for country i at time t; GDPi(t) is the nominal gross

442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017

This approach identied 198 episodes of bonanzas from 1980
to 2011, including 93 in EDA countries and 105 in advanced
economies (See Fig. 1). With each nancial crisis, there were
comovements in episodes of bonanzas for net capital inows
between the EDA countries and the advanced economies. Take
the global nancial crisis in 2008 as an example. The global
nancial crisis arose from the 2007 U.S. subprime mortgage
crisis. As shown in Fig. 1, net capital inow bonanza episodes
can be seen from 2004 with a sharp increase from 2007 to 2008,
and a sharp decrease in 2009 in both EDA countries and ad-
vanced economies. Fig. 1 shows that 14 EDA countries suffered
bonanzas over the two years, including Zimbabwe, Colombia,
Congo, Bulgaria, Brazil, Botswana, Uruguay, Turkey, Tunisia,
Mongolia, Honduras, Jamaica, Dominica Republic, and India,
accounting for 67% of all EDA countries. At the same time,
episodes of bonanzas of net capital inows appeared in ten ad-
vanced economies. Based on the historical data for the banking
and currency crisis episodes during the global nancial crisis
in 2008 [29], it was found that 7 of the 24 bonanzas-suffered
countries (14 EDA countries and 10 advanced economies) were
affected by the banking and currency crisis in 2008. This in-
dicated that the comovements in international capital ow bo-
nanzas have a heterogeneous contagion effect on cross-border
nancial shocks.

There are two reasons for the occurrence of a heteroge-
neous contagion effect. First, stronger nancial linkages with the
source country of nancial turbulence and the other volatility-
affected countries may make a country more vulnerable to be
bonanzas suffered [30]. Second, the vulnerability of a country to
a nancial crisis depends on the immunity and resilience of the
economic system, the strength of domestic macroeconomic fun-
damentals, government policy control, and investor condence
[31]. These reasons can explain why some countries that experi-
ence episodes of bonanzas of net capital inows are vulnerable
to nancial crises, while others are not.

C. HP Filter to Address Long-Term Net Capital Inow Trends
To estimate the net capital inow historical trends for country
i at time t [i.e., T rendi(t)], a ltering approach was employed.
The approach advocated here is based on the HP lter [26],
which was built on the earlier work of Whittaker [32], and is a
standard method in business cycle research for removing trend
movements. The HP lter was originally intended to decom-
pose the GDP values series into a long-term growth component
and a cyclical component. The mechanics of the lter splits the
series into two parts, a smooth and a volatile one.

In macroeconomics, the smooth part corresponds to long-term
growth and the volatile part to the business cycle. In the context
of net capital inows, the smooth part could be interpreted as
the long-term historical trend of the net capital inow (i.e.,
T rendi(t)) and the volatile part as deviations from the historical
trend (i.e., T Devi(t)). The complex factors that have short-
term impacts on the net capital inows lead to the volatility
uncertainty. The HP lter can be helpful in eliminating the
uncertain subordinate effect factors for the net capital inow
volatility by removing the volatile part to illuminate the long-
term historical trends of the net capital inow. Details for the

Fig. 1. Number of countries encountering international capital ow bonanzas
from 1980 to 2011 for EDA countries and advanced economies.

domestic product for country i at time t; and T rendi(t) is the
historical trend of the net capital inow for country i at time t.
Therefore, each episode of bonanza was identied as a sequence
of the years in which these criteria were met.

Forbes and Warnock [11] dened nancial contagion as large
changes in a countrys gross capital inows or outows result-
ing from circumstances in another country or group of countries
(but not the entire world). Here a mathematical denition for
contagion from a bonanza perspective is given.

Denition II.1: One or a group of markets, countries, or
institutions can be affected by bonanza contagion during a
nancial shock, if and only if their discrimination function
Bi(t) = 1.

XU et al.: FUZZY DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SCENARIO SIMULATION-BASED CROSS-BORDER FINANCIAL CONTAGION ANALYSIS

443

estimation of the long-term net capital inow trend using the
HP lter are described in Section III.

D. Dynamical System of Financial Contagion With Interval
Type-2 Fuzziness

To clearly examine the nonlinear interdependence and dy-
namics of the contagion effects between the source country of
nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected countries in a -
nancial time series when a shock occurs, the global nancial
system is treated as a dynamic system with different interna-
tional capital ow volatility levels and heterogeneous coupling
relationships between the subsystems. Countries are regarded
as being coupled through nancial linkages with the coupling
strength being determined based on the following factors: the
degree of nancial liberalization and capital account openness,
real sector linkages, nancial market linkages, nancial insti-
tution linkages, the interaction between nancial institutions
and nancial markets, and investor condence. Cross-border
transmission of nancial shocks and nancial contagion can be
seen as uctuations in the nonlinear interdependence between
the nonlinear dynamic systems. The source country of nancial
turbulence is considered the driving system which drives the
contagion effects to the volatility-affected countries, which, in
turn, are regarded as the response systems, so also have feed-
back effects on the driving system. A nancial shock in the
source country raises the energy in its nancial system, which
is consequently spread to other nancially linked countries.

Due to the nonlinear complexity of the nancial contagion
system, there are uncertainties during the dynamic transmis-
sion process, especially for the dynamic coupling relationships
between the different countries. In fact, as international cap-
ital ows are inherently involved with human decision mak-
ing such as investments, loans, foreign exchange trading, and
securities issuance, there is fuzziness in the coupling relation-
ship between the source country of nancial turbulence and the
volatility-affected country. Further, the interactive nancial con-
tagion effects between the source country of nancial turbulence
and the volatility-affected country result in the fuzziness of a
secondary membership function (MF) for the coupling relation-
ship. Since the coupling relationship appears as interval-type
data with second-order uncertainties, interval type-2 fuzzy sets
(IT-2 FSs) are employed to describe the coupling coefcient un-
certainties between the source country of nancial turbulence
and the volatility-affected country.

The concept of type-2 fuzzy sets (T-2 FSs) was introduced by
Zadeh [33] as an extension of the concept of type-1 fuzzy sets
(T-1 FSs). T-2 FSs are useful in circumstances where it is difcult
to specify a MF with precision [34] and have the potential to
outperform T-1 FSs [35]. To handle the high-level uncertainty
of data, Yager [36] proposed the rst decision support system
using T-2 FSs. Because the computational complexity when
using general T-2 FSs is very high, to date, IT-2 FSs [37] have
been the most widely used T-2 FSs, and have been successfully
applied to many practical elds [38][40].

In this paper, the mean (i.e., m ), left boundary (i.e., l ), and
right boundary (i.e., r ) of the preliminary estimated values for
the coupling coefcient can be identied from a group of sam-
ples, the details for which are explained in Section VIII. Let

= r

= m

 l be the distance between the left boundary and
dl 
 m , the distance between the right bound-
the mean dr 
ary and the mean, , the deviation rate of the left boundary and
the right boundary, and FIT-2(R), the set of all IT-2 fuzzy num-
bers on R. The concept of -level of the triangular IT-2 fuzzy
  FIT-2(R), 0    1, denoted by () is introduced
number
to address the IT-2 fuzziness of the coupling relationship and is
(cid:5)(cid:6)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
dened as:
() =

(cid:5)

(cid:4)

,

 dl 

l

 dr 

r

, l

+ dl 

, m

, r

+ dr 

, l

+ dl 

 dl 

(2)
where [l
] are the
deviation intervals for the left-hand endpoint l and the right-
 under the  level deviation rate. The upper
hand endpoint r of
and lower MFs of () are dened as:

 dr 

] and [r

+ dr 

, r

0,
x  (l
 (l
m
x  (r
 (r
m
0,

l

 dl 
)
 dl 
) ,
+ dr 
)
) , m
+ dr 

 dl 

x < l
 dl 
 x < r
+ dr 

x  r

 x < m

+ dr 

0,
x  (l
 (l
m
x  (r
 (r
m
0,

(3)

x < l

+ dl 

l

)
+ dl 
) ,
+ dl 
 dr 
)
 dr 
) , m

 x < m
 dr 

+ dl 
 x < r
 dr 

x  r






U M F

( )

(x) =

LM F

( )

(x) =

where U M F

(4)
(x) denotes the upper membership function,
( )
(x) the lower membership function of () , and
and LM F
the deviation rate  (0    1) reects the decision makers
judgment regarding the inaccuracy of the collected data. Fig. 2
illustrates the triangular IT-2 fuzzy MF for () . It should be
noted that a more normal expression for () can be dened as:

( )

() = ((l
(l

 dl 
+ dl 

, m

, r

, m

, r

+ dr 
 dr 

 ))

; H(()U
; H(()L

 )))

(5)

where H(()U
ment m in the upper triangular membership function ()U

 ) denotes the membership value of the ele-
 =
 ) denotes the membership value
U M F
of the element m in the lower triangular membership func-
tion ()L
 ) =

is assumed H(()U

(x), and H(()L

(x). Since it

 = LM F

( )

( )

444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017

real sector and the resilience of the nancial system to the shock.
However, the fuzzy dynamic system simulation analysis on the
international capital ow volatility in this paper may assist pol-
icymakers in identifying the nancial shock effect in the early
stages, thereby allowing them to anticipate the kind of inuence
the shock will have in the near future in the source country of
nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected countries so as
to implement appropriate nancial policies in advance.

A. Related Research on Dynamical System for Financial
Analysis

Due to the global impact of the nancial crisis, in recent
years, the application of dynamical system theory has become
a frontier issue in nancial analysis to address nancial conta-
gion problems [41]. Several important contributions have been
made in model development, theoretical testing, and nancial
policy establishment. Castellacci and Choi [4] built a multia-
gent dynamical system for the global economy to investigate
and analyze nancial crises based on cash ow data. They also
conducted a follow-up study on modeling contagion in the Euro-
zone crisis using a wealth dynamical system [42]. Son and Park
[43] investigated the effects of delayed feedback on the dy-
namical model of a nancial system, which described the time
variation in interest rates, investment demands, and price indices
to establish scal policy. Hu and Chen [44] modeled macroe-
conomics using a novel discrete nonlinear fractional dynamical
system which considered gross domestic product, ination, and
the unemployment rate. While these studies have signicantly
improved the nancial systems modeling through the use of
dynamical system theory based on the data of wealth, interest
rate, investment demand, price indices, gross domestic product,
ination, and unemployment rate, international capital ows
are still unexplored through establishing the dynamical system
model for nancial systems to reveal the dynamical features
and volatility transmission principles of the nancial contagion
in a more essential way. In fact, the changes in variables (i.e.,
equity returns, interest rates, exchange rates, sovereign spreads)
used to identify nancial contagion are ultimately reected as
the movements of the international capital inows and outows,
which is why nancial contagion is analyzed from an interna-
tional capital ow perspective in the dynamical system model
proposed in this paper. Additionally, the model proposed in this
paper extends the nancial contagion analysis of a dynamical
system under a liberal economy to a system that encompasses
macroeconomic control, which may be more useful for policy-
makers seeking to identify volatility transmission patterns and
develop response strategies to set nancial policy.

B. Model Formulation

The use of fuzzy differential equations (FDE) has been a
natural way to model dynamical systems under possibilistic
uncertainty [45], [46]. Fuzzy dynamical systems based on FDEs
have also been widely applied to fuzzy control systems [47],
bifurcations of fuzzy nonlinear dynamical systems [48], and
many other elds [49], [50].

Based on the above analysis, this paper seeks to establish a
fuzzy dynamical system scenario simulation model based on
FDEs to simulate the dynamics of contagion of international

Fig. 2. Triangular IT-2 fuzzy MF of ( ) .

Fig. 3. Dynamical system of nancial contagion with fuzziness for coupled
countries.

H(()L
 ) = 1 when handling the coupling coefcient uncer-
tainty, to simplify the expression, (2) is employed when per-
forming the mathematical derivation in the following sections.
 to
Therefore, a -level of the triangular IT-2 fuzzy number
describe the coupling coefcient uncertainty can be identied
using a parameterized quadruple:

, )|0    1}.

Let

(6)
Csv denote the fuzzy coupling coefcient for the impact
from the source country of nancial turbulence to the volatility-
Cv s be the fuzzy coupling coefcient for
affected country, and
the impact from the volatility-affected country to the source
country of nancial turbulence. Fig. 3 shows the dynamical
system of nancial contagion with triangular IT-2 fuzziness for
the coupled countries.

{(l

, m

, r

III. MODELING

Even though there is a potential for a shock to be transmitted
from one country to another, this does not mean it will deni-
tively occur. Whether a shock is transmitted, and whether it has
a large effect on the real sector depends on the resilience of the

XU et al.: FUZZY DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SCENARIO SIMULATION-BASED CROSS-BORDER FINANCIAL CONTAGION ANALYSIS

445

for the latter. Since the number of input parameters for the min-
imization problem in (7) is T , the computational complexity of
the above problem can be expressed as a function f(T ) (i.e.,
computation time, which is described as the number of steps
a Turing machine performs for a given input) which reects
the growth speed of computation time along with the increased
number of input parameters. To solve the minimization prob-
lem, the gradient of (8) for each T rendi(t) (t = 1, 2, . . . , T ) is
set to be zero; therefore, there are T gradient linear equations to
form a T  T square matrix equation which can be solved by
Gaussian elimination. It is well known that the computational
complexity of the Gaussian elimination for an n  n matrix is
O(n3) [51]. This means the computational complexity of the
minimization problem in (7) is f(T ) = O(T 3), which implies
that it belongs to a P (polynomial-time solvable) class problem
and has low computational complexity.

Although most researchers have followed HP [26] and used
a value of 1600 for the smoothing parameter when using quar-
terly data, there is less agreement in the literature when moving
to other frequencies. Backus and Kehoe [52] used a value of
100 for annual data, whereas Correia et al. [53] and Cooley
and Ohanian [54] suggested a value of 400. Baxter and King
[55] have shown that a value of around 10 for annual data is
much more reasonable. Ravn and Uhlig [27] found that the l-
ter smoothing parameter should be adjusted by multiplying it
with the fourth power of the observation frequency ratios. This
yielded a smoothing parameter value of 6.25 for annual data,
which was close to the value of 10 given by Baxter and King
[55]. This conclusion was further conrmed by Iacobucci and
Noullez [56].

To determine which  performed best for the datasets typi-
cally encountered in this study, the above four  candidate values
(i.e., 6.25, 10, 100, 400) for annual data were compared based on
the U.S. net capital inow data from 1980 to 2010 in Fig. 5. Let
F be the minimum value for (7), which shows the tness of the
group of data for T rendi(t) (t = 1, 2, . . . , T ) and is estimated
using the smoothing parameter . By inputting the four groups
of data for T rendi(t) (t = 1, 2, . . . , T ) with their correspond-
ing smoothing parameter value into (7), respectively, the tness
values for F with  = 6.25, 10, 100, 400 were calculated as
follows:

F6.25 = 1.725  103, F10 = 1.973  103
F100 = 3.908  103, F400 = 4.877  103.

Since F6.25 < F10 < F100 < F400, the test results showed that
N Fi(t)
GDPi(t) when  = 6.25.
the T rendi(t) best t the input series
As a result,  = 6.25 was selected to calculate T rendi(t) for
the annual data, and  = 1600 was selected for the quarterly
data in this paper.

ries

By employing the HP lter, the original noisy input se-
N Fi(t)
GDPi(t) can be decomposed into a trend component and
a cyclical component. Evidence from empirical investigations
has shown that a basic dynamical long-term trend for economic
variables is more suitable to be estimated using a trend com-
ponent [26]. Since the dynamical features of the nancial sys-
tem discussed in this paper correspond to a basic dynamical

Fig. 4. Historical trends of the net capital inows [i.e., T rendi (t)] for the
U.S. and Ireland during the global nancial crisis in 2008.

capital ow volatility between the source country of nancial
turbulence and the volatility-affected country. Through the ob-
servation of historical data focused on international capital ow
volatility in different countries over several nancial crisis, it
was found that in most cases, the net capital inows of the
source country of nancial turbulence gradually increased be-
fore the nancial shock occurred, and came to a sudden stop
(i.e., sharp decrease in net capital inows) after the shock. The
Mexican Peso crisis, the Asian nancial crisis in 1997, and the
global nancial crisis in 2008 are all salient examples. While the
reasons for the increase in the net capital inows to the source
country of nancial turbulence before the shock varied in the
different crises due to government policy errors, international -
nancial speculation, and improper long-term nancial policies,
the reasons for the sudden stop could be as simple as for-
eign investors rapidly withdrawing their capital from the source
country of nancial turbulence because they had lost condence
in the nancial markets after the shock. On the other hand, for
most of the volatility-affected countries, net capital inows in-
creased (i.e., the global nancial crisis in 2008 and the Mexican
Peso crisis, see Fig. 4) due to the large capital outows from
the source country of nancial turbulence. Fig. 4 illustrates the
historical trends of the net capital inows (i.e., T rendi(t)) for
the U.S. (i.e., the source country of nancial turbulence) and
Ireland (i.e., the volatility-affected country) during the global
nancial crisis in 2008.

To estimate the historical trends of the net capital inows
(i.e., T rendi(t)) for each country, the HP lter was employed,
which is a nonparametric method that returns a smoothed series
N Fi(t)
T rendi(t) from a noisy (or volatile) input series
GDPi(t) . Val-
ues T rendi(t) were chosen to solve the following minimization
problem:

T(cid:11)

t=1




min

T r en d i (t)

(cid:13)2
 T rendi(t)

(cid:12)
T 1(cid:11)
+
(T rendi(t)  T rendi(t  1))]2

N Fi(t)
GDPi(t)
[(T rendi(t + 1)  T rendi(t))

t=2




(7)

where T is the number of observations. The rst sum is the pun-
ishment for deviating from the original series and the second is
the punishment for roughness of the smoothed series. The larger
the value of the smoothing parameter , the higher is the penalty

446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017

considered the driving system, so T rends(t) is employed as a
state indicator of the driving system. Let b (b > 0) denote the
inertial coefcient of the source country of nancial turbulence,
and bT rends(t) be the inertial momentum. It can be seen that
the inertial momentum is linearly negatively correlated with the
historical trend T rends(t). On the other hand, the net capi-
tal inow for the volatility-affected country also deviates from
the normal equilibrium value in response to the contagion ef-
fects from the source country of nancial turbulence. Here, the
volatility-affected country is regarded as the response system,
so T rendv (t) is applied as the state indicator of the response
system. Let a be the inertial coefcient of the volatility-affected
country, which reects the inertial state of the rate of change for
the value of T rendv (t) before the impact of the nancial shock
becomes effective. When a < 0 (see Fig. 4), this means the net
capital inow trend in the volatility-affected country has an iner-
tial decreasing trend before the nancial shock takes effect, and
when a > 0, the inertial trend is increasing. Since a = 0 rarely
happens, to simplify the theoretical proof in the following sec-
tion, in this paper, it is assumed that a (cid:7)= 0. The driving system
also has a contagion effect  Csv T rendv (t)[T rends(t)]2 on
Cv sT rendv (t)[T rends(t)]2
the response system, so the term
describes the synthetic inuence of the driving effect from
the nancial shock and the feedback effect from the response
system.

Since most source countries of nancial turbulence have large
net capital inows before the nancial shock, and in most cases,
the net capital inows for the volatility-affected countries could
be negative or nonnegative when the shock spreads, this paper
considers the initial value of T rends(0) to be positive, and the
initial value of T rendv (0) to be either negative or nonnega-
tive. Let T s0 and T v0 be the initial values for T rends(0) and
T rendv (0), respectively, then the initial value (Cauchy) condi-
tions for the fuzzy dynamical system scenario simulation model

can be given as: (cid:2)

T rendv (0) = T v0  R
T rends(0) = T s0 > 0.

(8)

Csv and

It should be noted that the triangular IT-2 fuzzy coupling coef-
Cv s could be different because the source coun-
cients
try of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected country
may have different contagion mechanisms on the coupled chan-
nels. The inherent human involvement in international capital
Csv and
ows leads to the fuzziness in the coupling coefcients
Cv s, and the interactive nancial contagion effects between the
source country of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected
country result in the fuzziness in the secondary MFs for the
coupling coefcients, which can be regarded as the IT-2 fuzzy
numbers. The physical meaning of the above two uncertain pa-
rameters respectively reects the nancial coupling strength in
two opposite coupling directions (i.e.,
try of nancial turbulence to the volatility-affected country, and

sv, from the source coun-
vs, from the volatility-affected country to the source country

of nancial turbulence) between the source country of nancial
turbulence and the volatility-affected country for a nonlinear
nancial system, where the coupling strength shows the im-
pact level of the volatility transmission from the source country

Fig. 5. Comparing of different smoothing parameters for annual data based
on net capital inow data of the U.S.

long-term trend, it is reasonable to lter the short-term cyclical
component by applying the HP lter to reect the essential
basic trends in the nancial contagion dynamics from an in-
ternational capital ow perspective. In fact, the cointegration
theory and error-correction theory indicate that if there are co-
movements of economic variables during a set of time series,
they trend together to determine the long-term equilibrium, so
disturbances from the cyclical component have no effect on
long-term equilibrium convergence [57]. In the time series, the
long-term comovements of economic variables can be analyzed
by focusing on the trend component after the cycle component is
ltered out. The contagion analysis based on capital ow bonan-
zas in this paper indicated that there were comovements in the
international capital ows between the different countries that
suffered from nancial shock. These deviations from the long-
term international capital ow trend feed back to the dependent
variable changes to move toward a long-term equilibrium. As
a result, the trend component decomposed by the HP lter is
able to reect the essential characteristics of a basic dynamical
long-term trend when discussing nancial system stability.

This study, inspired by the idea of the two-country model
proposed by Stockman and Tesar [58], builds on several re-
cent works on capital ow volatility by Forbes and Warnock
[11], Neumann et al. [59], and Lee et al. [21]. To maintain
the capital account balance, the net capital inows of both the
source country of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected
country tend toward their equilibriums in normal years. Let
T rends(t) denote the historical trend of the net capital inow
for the source country of nancial turbulence, and T rendv (t),
for the volatility-affected country. When the impact of the nan-
cial shock is felt, the net capital inows in the source country
of nancial turbulence sharply decrease, adding to the driving
force. Therefore, the source country of nancial turbulence is

XU et al.: FUZZY DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SCENARIO SIMULATION-BASED CROSS-BORDER FINANCIAL CONTAGION ANALYSIS

447




of nancial turbulence or the volatility-affected country, and is
determined by the degree of nancial liberalization, capital ac-
count openness, capital structure, real sector linkages, nancial
linkages, and investor condence in the two countries. Based on
the above analysis, the following initial value (Cauchy) prob-
lem for the fuzzy dynamic system scenario simulation model is
established:

= a  Csv T rendv (t)[T rends(t)]2
=bT rends(t) + Cv sT rendv (t)[T rends(t)]2




dT rendv (t)

dt

dt

dT rends(t)
T rendv (0) = T v0  R
T rends(0) = T s0 > 0
a (cid:7)= 0
b > 0
Csv  FI T 2(R)
Cv s  FI T 2(R)

(9)
where T rends(t) is the historical trend of the net capital inow
for the source country of nancial turbulence; T rendv (t) is
the historical trend of the net capital inow for the volatility-
affected country; a is the inertial coefcient of the volatility-
affected country; b denotes the inertial coefcient of the source
Csv denotes the fuzzy coupling
country of nancial turbulence;
coefcient for the impact from the source country of nancial
Cv s is the fuzzy
turbulence to the volatility-affected country; and
coupling coefcient for the impact from the volatility-affected
country to the source country of nancial turbulence.

Csv and

C. Crisp Equivalent Model Under Boundary Value Conditions
Since it is not possible to describe the solution to the Model
Cv s are transferred
(9) unless the fuzzy coefcients
into a parameter cluster, here, a crisp operator  is intro-
duced, which transfers the -level of the triangular IT-2 fuzzy
number () into a parameter spectrum within the interval
[cl(() ), cr (() )], where cl(() ) and cr (() ) are the left-
and right-centroid boundaries [60] of the MF of () respec-
tively.

Based on the idea of the enhanced KarnikMendel (EKM) al-
gorithms [61], since the fuzzy coupling coefcients considered
in this paper are specic triangular IT-2 fuzzy numbers, the com-
putation of the centroid boundaries can be signicantly reduced
by employing the following equations to calculate cl(() ) and
cr (() ):
cl(() )
(cid:17) m 
(cid:17) m 
 d l 
 d l 

(cid:17) r 
(cid:17) r 

(x)dx +

(x)dx +

 d r 

 d r 

xU M F

xLM F

(x)dx

m 

m 

( )

( )

LM F

( )

l 

=

(x)dx

U M F

( )

l 

(10)

cr (() )
(cid:17) m 
(cid:17) m 

+ d l 

l 

l 

+ d l 

=

xLM F

( )

(x)dx +

LM F

( )

(x)dx +

(cid:17) r 
(cid:17) r 

m 

m 

+ d r 

+ d r 

xU M F

( )

(x)dx

.

U M F

( )

(x)dx

(11)

According to (2), (6), (10), and (11), for a -level of the
triangular IT-2 fuzzy number () considered in this paper, the
crisp operator  is dened as:

(() , ) = (1  )cl(() ) + cr (() )

(12)
where  is a cluster coefcient, and 0    1. When the values
 and  are xed, i.e.,  = 0 and  = 0, the Model (9) can be
transferred into a crisp equivalent model as:

dT rendv (t)

dt

dT rends(t)

dt

= a  (( Csv ) , )T rendv (t)[T rends(t)]2
= bT rends(t)
+(( Cv s) , )T rendv (t)[T rends(t)]2

T rendv (0) = T v0  R
T rends(0) = T s0 > 0
a (cid:7)= 0
b > 0
 = 0,
 = 0,

0    1
0    1

(13)
where  = 0 and  = 0 are regarded as the boundary value
conditions, and the above Model (13) is actually a boundary
value problem of the fuzzy dynamical system scenario simula-
tion model. When the cluster coefcient  varies in the interval
[0, 1], the Model (13) derives a cluster of crisp equivalent mod-
els for the fuzzy dynamical system scenario simulation model.
It should be noted that the selected value  may be different
for different coupling coefcients. However, for simplicity, this
paper assumes that all fuzzy coefcients in the model have the
same value . Since control inputs (i.e., investment or manage-
ment policies) from governments and nancial institutes are not
considered in Model (13), it is regarded as a dynamical system
model under a liberal economy, which simulates a free nancial
system with no macroeconomic interventions. However, when
a nancial crisis occurs, it is necessary for governments and
nancial institutes to take macroeconomic control to reduce the
nancial contagion impact. For the potential usage for policy-
makers, the next part extends the dynamical system model under
a liberal economy to a model with macroeconomic control to
establish effective nancial policies.

D. Dynamical System Model With Macroeconomic Control

During the global nancial crisis in 2008, the U.S. Federal
Reserve (FDR) and central banks around the world took a series
of emergency actions to expand money supply so as to avoid
the nancial contagion impact [62]. These government and

448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017




nancial institution capital injections and the associated man-
agement policies could be seen as macroeconomic control inputs
into the nancial system. Let v (t) and s(t) be the government
and nancial institution macroeconomic control inputs at time
t for the volatility-affected country and the source country of
nancial turbulence. Then Model (13), which reects the situ-
ation under a liberal economy, can be extended to a dynamical
system model with macroeconomic control as

dT rendv (t)

dt

dT rends (t)

dt

= a  (( Cs v ) , )T rendv (t)[T rends (t)]2

+v (t)

= bT rends (t)

+(( Cv s ) , )T rendv (t)[T rends (t)]2 + s (t)

T rendv (0) = T v0  R
T rends (0) = T s0 > 0
a (cid:7)= 0
b > 0
 = 0 ,
 = 0 ,

0    1
0    1

(14)

where v (t) and s(t) are regarded as the control impulses at
time t and are measured as net capital inows per unit time.
When a nancial crisis occurs, the government and nancial
institution capital injections and management policies in the
volatility-affected country and the source country of nancial
turbulence ultimately reect the changes in net capital inows
per unit time in the nancial system; therefore, the macroeco-
nomic control effect is relevant to the government and nan-
cial institution control impulses (i.e., v (t) and s(t)) from
the volatility-affected country and the source country of nan-
cial turbulence. When v (t) = 0 and s(t) = 0 for all time t,
Model (14) is reduced to a dynamical system model under a
liberal economy, as shown in Model (13).

The computational complexity of the simulation for both
Models (13) and (14) depends on the number of simulation
iterations (i.e., m). The time complexity for simulating Models
(13) and (14) is O(m), which indicates a low computational
complexity and implies that it belongs to a P (polynomial-time
solvable) class problem.

IV. MODEL ANALYSIS UNDER A LIBERAL ECONOMY

Since it is the dynamical system model under a liberal econ-
omy that shows the essential features of a nancial system
without macroeconomic interventions, this section discusses
the types of volatility equilibrium points for Model (13), an-
alyzes the asymptotic stability of the volatility equilibrium
point in different situations to form a series of volatility conta-
gion principles, and conducts a sensitivity analysis on the ini-
tial value conditions and boundary value conditions. It should
be noted that all analyses are based on the boundary value
problem for the fuzzy dynamical system scenario simulation
model with the initial value conditions T rendv (0) = T v0  R
and T rends(0) = T s0 > 0, and the boundary value conditions

 = 0 and  = 0. It is also assumed that (( Csv ) , ) > 0
and (( Cv s) , ) > 0, which reects a practical situation.

A. Volatility Equilibrium Point of the Model Under a Liberal
Economy

The volatility equilibrium points for the Model (13) are de-
ned as the points at which the rate of change for both T rendv (t)
and T rends(t) is zero. To analyze the asymptotic stability of the
model, the volatility equilibrium points for the model need to be
determined rst. Let  = a
b be the ratio of inertial coefcients,

 = (( Csv ) , )
(( Cv s) , )

be the ratio of the crisp fuzzy coupling coefcients,

s =

b

(( Cv s) , )

denote the exogenous coefcient of the source country of nan-
cial turbulence, which is the ratio of the inertial coefcient and
the crisp fuzzy coupling coefcient of the source country, and

v =

a

(( Csv ) , )

denote the exogenous coefcient of the volatility-affected coun-
try, which is the ratio of the inertial coefcient and the crisp
fuzzy coupling coefcient of the volatility-affected country.
Therefore, the ratio of the exogenous coefcients between the
volatility-affected country and the source country of nancial
turbulence is  = v
s

 . The following lemma is given.

= 

Lemma IV.1: (Exogenous position of the volatility equilib-
rium point) There is a unique volatility equilibrium point for
Model (13) located at ( s
, ), the position of which depends

on the exogenous coefcient of the source country of nancial
turbulence, and the ratio of the exogenous coefcients.

Proof: Let




dT rendv (t)

dt

dT rends(t)

dt

= 0

= 0.

Therefore,


 a  (( Csv ) , )T rendv (t)[T rends(t)]2 = 0
bT rends(t) + (( Cv s) , )T rendv (t)[T rends(t)]2 = 0.
By solving the above equations, the following unique solution
is determined:




T rendv (t) = b2(( Csv ) , )
a2(( Cv s) , )
T rends(t) = a(( Cv s) , )
b(( Csv ) , )

= s


= s


= 


= .

XU et al.: FUZZY DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SCENARIO SIMULATION-BASED CROSS-BORDER FINANCIAL CONTAGION ANALYSIS

449

The volatility equilibrium point for Model (13), therefore, is
located at ( s
, ), which implies that the position is dependent

on the exogenous coefcient of the source country of nancial
turbulence (i.e., s), and the ratio of the exogenous coefcients
(cid:2)
(i.e., ).

B. Volatility Contagion Principles Under a Liberal Economy
Based on a Local Asymptotic Stability Analysis

To address the nonlinearity of Model (13) before analyzing
the asymptotic stability of the volatility equilibrium point, a
typical approach has been local linearization. According Brauer
et al.[63], an asymptotic stability of the equilibrium point for
linearization implies an asymptotic stability of the equilibrium
for a nonlinear system. Conversely, instability of the equilibrium
point for the linearization implies instability of the equilibrium
for a nonlinear system. However, as each local model is known
to be valid for only a certain range of operating conditions, these
results only guarantee the local properties for nonlinear dynam-
ical systems. Nonetheless, since the fuzzy dynamical system
scenario simulation model in this paper is only for short-term
study, and Model (13) has good differentiability, continuity, and
convexity, the local asymptotic stability theory still has signi-
cance when handling the cases in this paper. Future research on
a more complex global asymptotic stability theory is discussed
in Section IX.

According to Lemma IV.1,
dx
dt

let x = T rendv (t), y =
T rends(t), x = s
= F (x, y),
= G(x, y),
the asymptotic stability or instability of the volatility equilib-
rium point for Model (13) is determined by the eigenvalues of
the following matrix A:

dy
dt

 , y = ,

 F (x, y)

G(x, y)

x

,

F (x, y)




(( Csv ) , )2, 2(( Csv ) , )s
(( Cv s) , )2, b + 2(( Cv s) , )s

G(x, y)

x

y

y

,

A =

=




where F (x, y) = a  (( Csv ) , )xy2 and G(x, y) = by +
(( Cv s) , )xy2. Let k = (( Csv ) , )2,
since s =

, thus matrix A could be

b

(( Cv s) , )
deduced as:

where

, and  = (( Csv ) , )
(( Cv s) , )


k, 2b

(cid:6)2 2(( Cv s) , )
(( Csv ) , )

(cid:3) a

A =

k =

k


b

b

,

is a synthetic of the inertial coefcients and coupling coefcients
which reects the inertia states of the initial net capital inow
volatility trend and the coupling strengths for both the source

country of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected coun-
try. The trace, determinant, and  of matrix A can be expressed
as

trA(x, y) = b  k,

detA(x, y) = bk

 = [trA(x, y)]2  4 detA(x, y) = b2  6bk + k2.
Based on the above analysis, the following principles are

given.

Principle IV.2: (Contractive

contagion) The
volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is locally asymp-
totically stable, which implies a contractive volatility conta-
gion between the source country of nancial turbulence and the

volatility

b
k

< 1.

volatility-affected country, if
Proof: Based on the local asymptotic stability theory, if
trA(x, y) = b  k < 0, and detA(x, y) = bk > 0, then the
volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is locally asymp-
totically stable. Since k = (( Csv ) , )2 > 0, and b > 0, this
< 1, then the
indicates that bk > 0 always holds. Therefore, if
volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is locally asymptoti-
cally stable. Based on an analysis of the phase portraits in this sit-
uation, the locally asymptotically stability of the volatility equi-
librium point implies a contractive volatility contagion between
the source country of nancial turbulence and the volatility-
(cid:2)
affected country.
Principle IV.3: (Steady contractive volatility contagion) The
volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is a locally asymptot-
ically stable node, which implies a steady contractive volatility
contagion between the source country of nancial turbulence

b
k

and the volatility-affected country, if

Proof: According to Principle IV.2, since

2 <
1, the volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is locally
asymptotically stable, which implies a contractive volatility con-
tagion between the source country of nancial turbulence and
the volatility-affected country. Based on local asymptotic stabil-
ity theory, if trA(x, y) = b  k < 0, detA(x, y) = bk > 0,
and  = b2  6bk + k2  0, then the volatility equilibrium
point for Model (13) is a locally asymptotically stable node.
Since k2 > 0, thus,

b
k


 3  2
b
k

2.

 3  2

 = b2  6bk + k2  0  

 3)2  8  b
k

 ( b
k

 3 + 2

k2 = ( b
k

 3  2

) + 1  0

)2  6( b
k

 3 + 2

2.

2 or

b
k

b
2 > 1 does not meet the requirements of
Since
k

trA(x, y) = b  k < 0, it can be known that only when

3  2
2, the volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is a
locally asymptotically stable node. Based on the analysis on
the phase portraits in this situation, a locally asymptotically
stable node implies that there is a steady contractive volatility
contagion between the source country of nancial turbulence
(cid:2)
and the volatility-affected country.
Principle IV.4: (Fluctuated contractive volatility contagion)
The volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is a locally

b
k

450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017

b
k

(13)

< 1.

for Model

asymptotically stable spiral point, which implies a uctuated
contractive volatility contagion between the source country of
nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected country, if 3 

2 <
Proof: According to local asymptotic stability theory, the
volatility equilibrium point
is a locally
asymptotically stable spiral point, if trA(x, y) = b  k < 0,
detA(x, y) = bk > 0, and  = b2  6bk + k2 < 0. Based on
< 1, and
the proofs in Principle IV.2 and IV.3, this means
3  
ble spiral point if 3  


2 > 1, the volatility equi-
librium point for Model (13) is a locally asymptotically sta-
< 1. By analyzing the phase
portraits in this situation, the locally asymptotically stable spi-
ral point implies a uctuated contractive volatility contagion
between the source country of nancial turbulence and the
(cid:2)
volatility-affected country.
Principle IV.5: (Steady expansile volatility contagion) The
volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is a locally unsta-
ble node, which implies a steady expansile volatility conta-
gion between the source country of nancial turbulence and the

2. Since 3 +

< 3 +

2 <

2 <



b
k

b
k

b
k


 3 + 2

2.

b
k

volatility-affected country, if

b
k

> 1, and


 3 + 2
b
k

 3 + 2

Proof: Similar to the proof in Principle IV.4, the volatility
equilibrium point for Model (13) is a locally unstable node,
if trA(x, y) = b  k > 0, detA(x, y) = bk > 0, and  =

 3  2
b2  6bk + k2  0. This means
2,

2. Since 3  2

b
k
2 < 1, the volatility equilib-
or
rium point for Model (13) is a locally unstable node, only if
b
2. The analysis of the phase portraits in this situ-
k
ation indicates that the locally unstable node implies a steady
expansile volatility contagion between the source country of
(cid:2)
nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected country.
Principle IV.6: (Fluctuated expansile (FE) volatility conta-
gion) The volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is a lo-
cally unstable spiral point, which implies an FE volatility con-
tagion between the source country of nancial turbulence and
the volatility-affected country, if 1 <
detA
(x, y) = bk > 0, and  = b2  6bk + k2 < 0, the volatility

equilibrium point for Model (13) is a locally unstable spiral
< 3 + 2
2.
Because 3  
2 < 1, the volatility equilibrium point for Model

< 3 + 2
(13) is a locally unstable spiral point if 1 <
2.
By analyzing the phase portraits in this situation, the locally
implies an FE volatility contagion
unstable spiral point
between the source country of nancial turbulence and the
(cid:2)
volatility-affected country.
Principle IV.7: (Fluctuated stationary volatility contagion)
The volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is a center
point, which implies a uctuated stationary volatility conta-
gion between the source country of nancial turbulence and the

2.
trA(x, y) = b  k > 0,

> 1, and 3  


< 3 + 2

point. This implies

Proof: Since

when

2 <

b
k

b
k

b
k

b
k

volatility-affected country, if

b
k

= 1.

Fig. 6.
under a liberal economy.

Phase portraits for different types of volatility transmission patterns

b
k

The above principles indicate that in this paper

Proof: When trA(x, y) = b  k = 0 and detA(x, y) =
bk > 0, the volatility equilibrium point for Model (13) is a cen-
= 1. By observing the phase portraits
ter point. This means
in this situation, it can be seen that the point near the volatil-
ity equilibrium point follows a circular movement and periodi-
cally surrounds the center which implies a uctuated stationary
volatility contagion between the source country of nancial tur-
(cid:2)
bulence and the volatility-affected country.
b
k could be
regarded as a volatility transmission pattern indicator of the -
nancial contagion which reects the uctuation behavior (i.e.,
steady or uctuated) and the trend directions (i.e., contractive,
expansile, or stationary). These volatility contagion principles
describe six types of volatility transmission patterns for inter-
national capital ows, in which the contractive and expansile
volatility contagions show a strong similarity to the volatility
transmission patterns in stock markets [20] and the heat-wave
and meteor-shower effects in foreign exchange markets [19].
The steady or uctuated contractive and expansile volatility
contagions are extensions of the basic volatility transmission
patterns and give more details about the uctuation behavior.
The uctuated stationary volatility contagion is a specic case
and rarely happens in practical situations. It should be noted,
however, that all the above principles are only applicable to the
local area that contains the volatility equilibrium point.

Based on the above analysis, all possible phase portraits for
the different volatility transmission patterns for Model (13) are
illustrated in Fig. 6, where the boundary value conditions are set
as:  = 0.1,  = 0.5. Table II shows the parameter settings for
the initial value conditions, inertial coefcients, and triangular

XU et al.: FUZZY DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SCENARIO SIMULATION-BASED CROSS-BORDER FINANCIAL CONTAGION ANALYSIS

451

PARAMETER SETTINGS FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF VOLATILITY

TRANSMISSION PATTERNS

TABLE II

rium point for Model (13) in D, the volatilities in both countries
will increase without restriction in D, which implies a local
expansivity of expansile volatility contagion.

Parameter Settings

Pattern
indicator

Type

Inertial

coefcient

Initial value
condition

b
k

0.022
0.796
6.128
1.480
1.000

SC
FC
SE
FE
FS

b

a

T r en d v (0)

T r en d s (0)

0.106
0.446
0.546
0.458
0.666

0.223
0.323
0.223
0.285
0.203

0.092
1.120
2.150
0.092
0.320

1.610
0.420
0.350
0.064
0.320

 -level of triangular IT-2 fuzzy coupling coefcient

( Cs v )

( Cv s )

([0.73,0.74], 0.98, [1.39,1.41])
([1.04,1.05], 1.19, [1.32,1.33])
([0.74,0.76], 0.98, [1.21,1.23])
([0.64,0.68], 0.75, [0.81,0.84])
([9.40,9.48], 9.61, [9.74,9.81])

SC
FC
SE
FE
FS
SC=Steady contractive, FC=Fluctuated contractive,
SE=Steady expansile, FE=Fluctuated expansile,
FS=Fluctuated Stationary

([0.87,0.89],1.03,[1.24,1.27])
([0.89,0.92],1.12,[1.35,1.39])
([0.58,0.61],0.72,[0.96,0.99])
([0.68,0.71],0.77,[0.84,0.89])
([7.79,7.83],7.91,[7.99,8.07])

IT-2 fuzzy coupling coefcients for the above ve different
situations.

Let D be a simple connected region in the volatility contagion
trend plane with a boundary C, then the following principle can
be obtained.

b
k

Principle IV.8: (Local expansivity of expansile volatility
> 1, then there is a simple connected region
contagion) If
D such that there is no limit cycle for the volatility equilibrium
point for Model (13) in D, where D is the neighborhood of the
volatility equilibrium point, and F (x, y) and G(x, y) are both
continuously differentiable near the volatility equilibrium point
in D, which implies a local expansivity of expansile volatility
contagion.

b
k

Proof: Since

> 1, this implies
trA(x, y) = b  k = F (x, y)

x

+ G(x, y)

y

> 0.

x

y

x

y

F (x, y)

+ G(x, y)

+ G(x, y)

Because F (x, y) and G(x, y) are both continuously differen-
tiable near the volatility equilibrium point, there must be a sim-
> 0
ple connected region D such that
for any (x, y)  D. According to Bendixsons theorem [64], if
F (x, y)
is either strictly positive or strictly neg-
ative in a simply connected region D, then there is no periodic
= G(x, y) in D, which means there
orbit for
is no limit cycle for the volatility equilibrium point for Model
> 1,
(13) in D. According to Principles IV.5 and IV.6, if
this implies an expansile volatility contagion between the
source country of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected
country. Since there is no limit cycle for the volatility equilib-

= F (x, y),

dx
dt

dy
dt

b
k

C. Sensitivity Analysis on Initial Value Conditions for Model
Calibration Under a Liberal Economy

It is important to explore what happens if the volatility-
affected countries have different initial net capital inow con-
ditions when a nancial shock takes effect. Based on historical
data, it can be seen that most real nancial crises fall into an
2. As
FE volatility contagion situation, i.e., 1 <
a result, the sensitivity analysis on the initial value conditions
is focused on an FE volatility contagion situation. The bound-
ary value conditions are set as:  = 0.1,  = 0.5. These results
could provide managerial insights to policymakers.


< 3 + 2

b
k

In this analysis, the sensitivity of the initial value conditions
for the volatility-affected country and the source country of -
nancial turbulence are, respectively, tested. To test the sensitivity
of the initial value condition for the volatility-affected country,
the initial value of T rends(0) for the source country of nan-
cial turbulence is xed at 0.064, and the three initial values
of T rendv (0) for the volatility-affected country, i.e., 0.0915,
0.0920, 0.0925, are selected for the fuzzy dynamical system
scenario simulation testing. To test the sensitivity of the initial
value condition for the source country of nancial turbulence,
the initial value T rendv (0) for the volatility-affected country is
xed at 0.0920, and the three initial values for T rends(0) for
the source country of nancial turbulence, i.e., 0.0635, 0.0640,
0.0645, are selected for the fuzzy dynamical system scenario
simulation testing. The parameter settings for the inertial co-
efcients and the -level of the triangular IT-2 fuzzy coupling
coefcients for the FE volatility contagion in Table II were
employed. The simulation results are shown in Fig. 7. Both
the net capital inow simulated trend results for the volatility-
affected country and the source country of nancial turbulence
from the above two test groups shown in Fig. 7 indicate a high
sensitivity level to the initial value conditions. A very small
deviation in the initial value of T rendv (0) can lead to signif-
icant capital inow trend deviations for the volatility-affected
country and the source country of nancial turbulence which
seriously impacts the nancial system. The testing on the initial
value of T rends(0) shows an even higher sensitivity compared
with T rendv (0). The simulated tracks for the trends of capital
inow for the source country of nancial turbulence and the
volatility-affected country in the two test groups imply that the
net capital inow trends in the two countries uctuate in the
early stages, then the vibration amplitude gradually increases,
and nally, the net capital inow trend in the volatility-affected
country increases sharply, while the net capital inow trend in
the source country of nancial turbulence rst decreases sharply
and then gradually slows down. The results in Fig. 7 also imply
that a volatility-affected country with a lower initial value for
T rendv (0) would suffer more signicant capital inow devia-
tions, while a source country of nancial turbulence with a lower
initial value for T rends(0) would have a stronger volatility con-
tagion effect on the volatility-affected country. Therefore, it is
important for governments and nancial institutions to control

452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017

Fig. 7.

Simulation results for sensitivity analysis on initial value conditions under the situation of FE volatility contagion.

the volatility in the early stages, as deviations sharply increase
after the early uctuations.

D. Sensitivity Analysis on Boundary Value Conditions for
Model Calibration Under a Liberal Economy

A sensitivity analysis on the boundary value conditions was
also conducted to check the robustness of the deviation rate 
and the cluster coefcient  on Model (13). The parameter set-
tings for the FE volatility contagion in Table II were employed.
To test the robustness of the cluster coefcient , the deviation
rate  was set as  = 0.1, and the three cluster coefcients, i.e.,
 = 0.25,  = 0.5, and  = 0.75, were selected for the simula-
tion testing. To test the robustness of the deviation rate , the
cluster coefcient  was set to  = 0.5, and the three deviation
rates, i.e.,  = 0.05,  = 0.1, and  = 0.15, were selected. The
simulation results for the above two test groups shown in Fig. 8
illustrate the simulated trends of the net capital inows for the
volatility-affected country and the source country of nancial
turbulence, and the simulated tracks for the trends of capital
inows for the source country of nancial turbulence and the
volatility-affected country. The simulated trends of the net cap-
ital inows for the volatility-affected country and the source
country of nancial turbulence shown in Fig. 8 indicate a rela-
tively high level of stability in the early stage for both the cluster
coefcient  and the deviation rate , as a small deviation in
the cluster coefcient  or the deviation rate  does not lead
to a signicant difference in the simulated trends for the net
capital inows for both the volatility-affected country and the

source country of nancial turbulence. It also implies that the
vibration amplitude under different boundary value conditions
is linearly negatively correlated with the cluster coefcient .
This phenomenon also applies to the deviation rate . While
there are some uctuations in the capital inow trends for both
two countries over time, the simulated tracks under different
boundary value conditions have nearly the same trend as the
track in the early stage. Therefore, the simulated tracks for the
capital inow trends for the source country of nancial turbu-
lence and the volatility-affected country conrm the stability of
the boundary value conditions in the early stage for Model (13).
This property of the boundary value conditions for Model (13)
indicates that the fuzzy dynamical system scenario simulation
analysis on nancial contagion through the perspective of inter-
national capital ow volatility is feasible, as small deviations in
the estimated parameters do not lead to misleading results.

V. MODEL ANALYSIS WITH MACROECONOMIC CONTROL
This section discusses the properties of Model (14) under a
macroeconomic control situation. Since Model (14) can be re-
garded as an extension of Model (13), based on the Lemma IV.1,
and the Principles IV.2IV.7 proved in the model analysis under
a liberal economy, similar conclusion can be derived for Model
(14), as shown in Principle V.1. To simplify the expression, the
following variables are introduced and dened:
(t) = (( Csv ) , ) s(t)

+ (( Cv s) , )

(cid:24)

b

(cid:25)

a
b

+ v (t)
b

XU et al.: FUZZY DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SCENARIO SIMULATION-BASED CROSS-BORDER FINANCIAL CONTAGION ANALYSIS

453

Fig. 8.

Simulation results for sensitivity analysis on boundary value conditions under the situation of FE volatility contagion.

(t) =

2(( Cv s) , )(a + v (t))

(t)

,

(t) =

 2(t)

(( Csv ) , )

.

Principle V.1: (Volatility contagion principle with macroe-
conomic control) There is a unique volatility equilibrium point
for Model (14) located at

(cid:27)

(cid:26)

a + v (t)

(t)

,

(t)

(( Csv ) , )

at time t, which implies ve different volatility contagion pat-
terns between the source country of nancial turbulence and
the volatility-affected country at time t as described below:
1) when (t) < (t) + b and [(t) + b + (t)]2  2[2(t) +
b2 + 2(t)], this is a locally asymptotically stable node which
implies a steady contractive volatility contagion at time t; 2)
when (t) < (t) + b and [(t) + b + (t)]2 < 2[2(t) + b2 +
2(t)], this is a locally asymptotically stable spiral point which
implies a uctuated contractive volatility contagion at time t; 3)
when (t) > (t) + b and [(t) + b + (t)]2  2[2(t) + b2 +
2(t)], this is a locally unstable node which implies a steady ex-
pansile volatility contagion at time t; 4) when (t) > (t) + b
and [(t) + b + (t)]2 < 2[2(t) + b2 + 2(t)], this is a locally
unstable spiral point which implies an FE volatility contagion
at time t; 5) when (t) = (t) + b, this is a center point which
implies a uctuated stationary volatility contagion at time t.

Due to length limitations, the proof for Principle V.1 is omit-
ted. Note that the volatility equilibrium point for Model (14) is

time varying, which implies that the macroeconomic control in-
put (i.e., v (t) and s(t)) at time t changes the original volatility
contagion pattern between the source country of nancial tur-
bulence and the volatility-affected country. If the strength of the
macroeconomic control input is appropriate, it may be possible
for governments and nancial institutions in the source coun-
try of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected countries
to reduce the nancial crisis impact by breaking the original
volatility contagion pattern and change the nancial situation
from an economic recession to a better economic equilibrium
trend.

VI. POLICY SUGGESTIONS AND EXPLORATION

OF RESPONSE STRATEGIES

In this section, policy suggestions are summarized based on
the model analysis under a liberal economy, and nancial crisis
response strategies are presented based on the macroeconomic
control model analysis for potential usage in the establishment
of nancial policy.

A. Policy Suggestions

Based on the model analysis under a liberal economy, from
the perspective of the international capital ow analysis, the
following dynamical system mechanisms of nancial contagion
are concluded in three different situations, which may provide
insightful suggestions for policymakers in governments and -
nancial institutions.

454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017

b
k

b
k

b
k

2 <


< 3  2

Situation 1: When the pattern indicator of the volatility conta-
< 1, according to Principles IV.2, IV.3, and IV.4, this
gion is
implies a contractive volatility contagion between the source
country of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected coun-
2, there is a steady contractive volatility

try; when

contagion; and when 3  2
< 1, there is a uctuated
contractive volatility contagion. If the volatility equilibrium
point (i.e., (x, y)) is located in a position close to the initial
position (i.e., (T rendv (0), T rends(0))) along the trend track,
the uctuations of the trends of the net capital inows for the
source country of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected
countries are controllable, and the nancial volatility contagion
does not innitely increase. The spread of the nancial shock
is limited due to the economic immunity and resilience of the
source country of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected
countries.
the volatility equilibrium point
(i.e., (x, y)) is located far from the initial position [i.e.,
(T rendv (0), T rends(0))] along the trend track, the local the-
ory of the fuzzy dynamical system is not sufcient to solve
the problem, so a global theory of the fuzzy dynamical system
should be employed. However, since Model (13) has good differ-
entiability, continuity, and convexity, local theory is applicable
to a relatively large region in the plane, and a nancial shock
may lead to serious net capital inow volatilities for both the
source country of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected
countries. Efcient monetary policies and scal policies must
be implemented by the governments and nancial institutions
to control the situation so as to slow down the spread of the
nancial shock and reduce nancial loss.

On the other hand,

if

Situation 2: When the pattern indicator of the volatility conta-
> 1, according to Principles IV.5 and IV.6, this implies

gion is

b
k


 3 + 2

< 3 + 2

b
k

2) or

b
k

a steady expansile volatility contagion (when

2). Since it
a FE volatility contagion (when 1 <
has been proved in Principle IV.8 that no matter whether the
initial position (i.e., (T rendv (0), T rends(0))) is far from or
near to the volatility equilibrium point (i.e., (x, y)), because
b
> 1 and F (x, y) and G(x, y) are both continuously differen-
k
tiable in the whole plane space (i.e., R2), a simple connected
region D can be found where both the initial position and the
volatility equilibrium point are in D, so there is no limit cy-
cle for the volatility equilibrium point or the initial position for
Model (13) in D, which implies a local expansivity of expansile
volatility contagion. This is the worst nancial contagion situ-
ation, as there is no limit to the spread of the nancial shock.
The net capital ow trends for both the source country of nan-
cial turbulence and the volatility-affected country may sharply
uctuate and lead to an extensive spread of the nancial crisis.
The nonlinear contagion effects between the source country of
nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected country become
increasingly stronger over a short time and have a serious im-
pact on the nancial markets and trade exports. Governments
and nancial institutes need to implement decisive and effective
economic policies before and after the nancial shock.

Situation 3: When the pattern indicator of the volatility con-
k = 1, according to Principle IV.7, this implies a uc-
tagion is b
tuated stationary volatility contagion. In this situation, the net
capital ow trends for both the source country of nancial turbu-
lence and the volatility-affected country periodically uctuate
within a limited range; however, a small disturbance or shock
may result in greater uctuation amplitude. As this situation
usually occurs in the early stages of the nancial shock spread,
the potential risk of a nancial crisis is usually ignored. How-
ever, for governments and nancial institutions, this is the best
time to control an extensive spread of the nancial shock, as the
nancial contagion in this situation is suppressed and unstable
under a relatively weak transmission mechanism.

B. Exploration of Response Strategies

Based on the macroeconomic control model analysis, a ten-
tative exploration of possible nancial crisis response strategies
is presented to guide nancial policy. Before a nancial crisis
occurs, Principles IV.2-IV.7, which were proven in the model
analysis under a liberal economy, can be employed to identify
the situation using the pattern indicator of the volatility conta-
gion b
k . If a nancial shock occurs, governments and nancial
institutions in the source country of nancial turbulence and the
volatility-affected country must take timely action to implement
nancial policy for reducing the nancial crisis impact.

According to Principle V.1, discussed in the macroeconomic
control model analysis, the following considerations may be
useful for the development of appropriate response strategies.
To reduce the nancial shock impact, the best strategy for the
governments and nancial institutions in the source country
of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected country is to
break the current volatility contagion pattern at time t0 and
converge to a new volatility equilibrium point (i.e., (x, y))
near to the current position (i.e., (T rendv (t0), T rends(t0))).
This would result in a more stable economic state following a
contractive volatility contagion (steady or uctuated) pattern by
continuously implementing macroeconomic control from time
t0. Due to the huge data quantities of international capital in-
ows and outows and data restrictions from governments and
nancial institutions, rather than presenting a real-world case
study, a numerical experiment is presented, as shown in Fig. 9.
In this experiment, the parameter settings for the inertial coef-
cients, initial value condition, and -level of the triangular IT-2
fuzzy coupling coefcients for the FE volatility contagion in
Table II are employed, in which the boundary value conditions
are set as:  = 0.1,  = 0.5. To enable the readers to have a
better understanding of the macroeconomic control effect, the
input control variables (i.e., v (t) and s(t)) are dened as
continuous xed control impulses from time t0, which lead to a
uctuated contractive volatility contagion pattern as expressed
below:

v (t) =

0,
0.02,

t < t0
t  t0

, s(t) =

0,
0.08,

t < t0
t  t0.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

the net capital

As shown in Fig. 9, after macroeconomic control is taken
from time t0,
inow simulated trends for
the volatility-affected country and the source country of
nancial
turbulence change from the original FE volatil-
ity contagion pattern into a uctuated contractive volatility

XU et al.: FUZZY DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SCENARIO SIMULATION-BASED CROSS-BORDER FINANCIAL CONTAGION ANALYSIS

455

Fig. 9.

Simulation results for dynamical system model with macroeconomic control.

contagion pattern. The simulated track of the trend of net cap-
ital inows for the source country of nancial turbulence and
the volatility-affected country also shows that the macroeco-
nomic control breaks the current volatility contagion pattern
since from t0 and drives the point (T rendv (t), T rends(t))
following a uctuated contractive volatility contagion pattern
to a new volatility equilibrium point near to the current posi-
tion (i.e., (T rendv (t0), T rends(t0))) to avoid sharp nancial
uctuations and the extensive spread of the nancial shock.
Since the volatility-affected country usually encounters large
net capital inows during a nancial crisis, its corresponding
macroeconomic control value is set at a negative value (i.e.,
v (t) = 0.02, when t  t0), and similarly, the corresponding
macroeconomic control value for the source country of nan-
cial turbulence is set at a positive value (i.e., s(t) = 0.08, when
t  t0) to offset the drastic net capital outows.

By adjusting the macroeconomic control input values, dif-
ferent volatility contagion patterns between the source country
of nancial turbulence and the volatility-affected country can
be simulated, which can be useful references for policymak-
ers when seeking to develop effective response strategies. The
numerical experiment also indicates that appropriate response
strategies depend on cooperative macroeconomic control poli-
cies in both the source country of nancial turbulence and the
volatility-affected country. Any poor decision from either coun-
try may lead to disordered nancial uctuations and serious
impacts on the nancial markets in both countries. Therefore,
the cross-border cooperative macroeconomic control strategies
among governments and nancial institutions in different coun-
tries may be an important trend for future research. Chaotic
behavior of the governments and nancial institutions in the
dynamical system model of the nancial system is the next step
of this study.

VII. SCENARIO SIMULATION FRAMEWORK

To show the complete modeling and simulation process for
different nancial contagion situations, a scenario simulation
framework was developed as shown in Fig. 10. There are
seven main procedures in the scenario simulation in this pa-
per, including the establishment of the fuzzy dynamical system,
crisp equivalent model transformation, model calibration for ini-
tial value conditions and boundary value conditions, volatility

transmission pattern identication, scenario analysis, policy
suggestions, and the exploration of response strategies.

The technologies involved in the establishment of the fuzzy
dynamical system are the HP lter to address long-term net
capital inow trends, IT-2 fuzzy numbers to express the cou-
pling coefcient uncertainties, and FDEs to describe the dy-
namics of the driving and response systems in the nancial
contagion. In the crisp equivalent model transformation, the
idea of EKM algorithms is employed, and the boundary value
conditions are formulated by dening the clustering coefcient
and the deviation rate, which allow for the IT-2 fuzzy simulation
of the fuzzy dynamical system. The model calibration for the
initial value conditions and the boundary value conditions tests
the stability of the fuzzy dynamical system scenario simulation
model. After volatility transmission pattern identication, sce-
nario analyses and policy suggestions under a liberal economy
can be developed for different nancial contagion situations ac-
cording to the principles derived in Sections IV and VI. The
exploration of response strategies can be used as references for
the establishment of nancial policy by employing the principle
of model analysis with macroeconomic control, as discussed in
Sections V and VI.

VIII. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY

To test the effectiveness of the fuzzy dynamical system sce-
nario simulation model, the global nancial crisis in 2008 was
employed as an experimental study. All data for estimating the
model parameters were collected from CEICs global database
[65].

A. Identication of Source Country of Financial Turbulence
and Volatility-Affected Countries

In the experimental study, the source country of the nancial
turbulence and volatility-affected countries were determined ac-
cording to the real-world situation. In fact, there has been evi-
dence showing that the United States was the epicentre of the
global nancial crisis which originated from the subprime mort-
gage crisis in August 2007 [62]. Financial institutions in other
advanced economies were affected because of their exposure to
structured credits and because of weaknesses in prudential su-
pervision and the nancial institution risk-management systems.
Barclays Capital pointed out that the exposure of banks in the

456

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017

PARAMETER ESTIMATIONS FOR THE FIVE SELECTED COUNTRIES

TABLE III

Country

Parameter Estimation

Name

b

Ireland
Italy
Spain
Denmark
Belgium

0.318
0.318
0.318
0.318
0.318

a

0.385
0.413
0.113
0.407
0.419

T r en d v (0)

T r en d s (0)

0.018
0.013
0.081
0.034
0.026

0.052
0.052
0.052
0.052
0.052

 -level of triangular IT-2 fuzzy coupling coefcient

( Cs v )

( Cv s )

Ireland
Italy
Spain
Denmark
Belgium

([2.82,2.93], 3.25, [3.69,3.77])
([2.63,2.71], 2.97, [3.24,3.32])
([0.91,1.02], 1.27, [1.61,1.69])
([1.61,1.69], 1.94, [2.34,2.53])
([1.43,1.51], 1.75, [1.97,2.11])

([0.41,0.48],0.67,[0.89,0.95])
([0.35,0.39],0.49,[0.61,0.68])
([0.62,0.69],0.83,[1.02,1.09])
([0.32,0.39],0.51,[0.75,0.82])
([0.31,0.38],0.43,[0.57,0.61])

were selected as the volatility-affected countries as they were
identied as both bonanzas-suffered and crisis-affected during
the global nancial crisis in 2008.

B. Parameter Estimation

The long-term net capital inow trends for each country were
estimated by employing the HP lter on the historical data. The
inertial coefcient of the source country of nancial turbulence
b and the inertial coefcient of the volatility-affected country a
were estimated based on the historical net capital inows and the
GDP trend data in the selected countries. It should be noted that
the ratio of net capital inows to the nominal GDP of a country
is employed in this paper, since a country with a much higher
nominal GDP is more resilient to net capital inow volatility.
The -level of the triangular IT-2 fuzzy coupling coefcients
( Csv ) and ( Cv s) were estimated for each country using the
following steps. First, a group of preliminary estimated values
for each of the two parameters were determined by employing
a multivariate nonlinear regression method based on a group
of samples from the net capital inow historical trend data ac-
cording to the differential equations in Model (13), in which
the inertial coefcients b and a had already been estimated and
were regarded as known parameters. The historical trend data
for the group of samples were taken from different time se-
ries. Then, the mean (i.e., m ), left boundary (i.e., l ), and right
boundary (i.e., r ) for the preliminary estimated values were
integrated and transferred into the -level of the triangular IT-

2 fuzzy numbers (i.e., () = ([l
, [r
])) for each of the two parameters, where the de-
dr 
 l ,
viation rate  was set within the interval [0, 1], dl 
 m . Table III shows the parameter estimations
and dr 
for the ve selected countries.

 dl 

+ dr 

= m

, l

+ dl 

], m

, r

= r

C. Scenario Simulation for Verication

Based on the above estimated parameters, the fuzzy dynami-
cal system scenario simulation was implemented for each coun-
try. To maintain consistent comparisons between the different

Fig. 10.

Scenario simulation framework of the nancial contagion.

United States to Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain achieved
17.6 billion dollar. Cross-sectional exposure also played an im-
portant role in the contagion through direct borrowing and parent
funding. From the end of 2009, some European countries had
experienced a debt crisis as a ratio of debt to GDP that signi-
cantly exceeded the specied value set by the Maastricht Treaty.
A 750 billion Euro rescue plan was consequently approved by
the European Union to prevent the debt crisis spreading. Based
on the above analysis and through an investigation of the his-
torical data, the U.S. was regarded as the source country of the
nancial turbulence in this experimental study, and ve coun-
tries, including Ireland, Italy, Spain, Denmark, and Belgium,

XU et al.: FUZZY DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SCENARIO SIMULATION-BASED CROSS-BORDER FINANCIAL CONTAGION ANALYSIS

457

D. Results Analysis and Discussions

In Fig. 11, the simulated net capital inow trends had a sig-
nicantly greater variation trend than the historical long-term
net capital inow trends. This was considered reasonable as the
FDR and most central banks continuously implemented bailout
measures, monetary policies, and scal policies to efciently
weaken the nancial shock spread during the nancial crisis.

The historical long-term net capital inow trends for each
country in Fig. 11 also imply that a nancial contagion may
spread before a nancial shock occurs. There may be an accu-
mulative effect during the early stages of a nancial contagion
which may bring the volatility-affected countries into bonanzas-
suffered, and a dramatic trend change of the net capital inow
will occur for the volatility-affected countries when the nancial
shock happens and may nally lead them to be crisis-affected.
This explains the dynamical mechanism of the nancial conta-
gion from the perspective of international capital ows.

IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Financial globalization has accelerated the formulation of a
complex nonlinear dynamical system constituted by an exten-
sive nancial linkage coupling of economic subsystems. This
paper investigated nancial contagion based on a fuzzy dy-
namical system scenario simulation to analyze the volatility of
international capital ows for a panel of 50 countries in emerg-
ing markets and advanced economies from 1980 to 2011. The
method proposed in this paper may assist policymakers who
identify volatility transmission patterns of a nancial shock in
early stages to allow for the formulation of appropriate response
strategies that can be used as references for the establishment of
effective monetary and scal policies.

The contagion effects of the bonanza spread in the 50 coun-
tries were identied and analyzed. The results indicated that the
comovements of international capital ow bonanzas have het-
erogeneous contagion effects for nancial shock across coun-
tries. The HP lter was employed to address the long-term
net capital inow trends. The comovement of nancial conta-
gion between the source country of nancial turbulence and
the volatility-affected country was described as a fuzzy dynam-
ical system in which the driving and response systems were
coupled. A fuzzy dynamical system scenario simulation model
under a liberal economy was established to describe the con-
tagion mechanism and the effects on the international capital
ow volatility, which was then extended to a dynamical system
model with macroeconomic control.

The uncertainty of the coupling strength was addressed by
employing the IT-2 fuzzy theory method. The properties of the
volatility equilibrium point for the above two models, as well as
the volatility contagion principles based on locally asymptotic
stability analysis, were discussed for explaining the different
volatility transmission patterns. Policy suggestions were made
in three situations for providing managerial insights for policy-
makers and an exploration of possible response strategies was
also presented. A scenario simulation framework was built to
illustrate the simulation and modeling method. The global -
nancial crisis in 2008 was employed as an empirical study, in
which the dynamical mechanism of the nancial contagion was
explained.

Fig. 11. Results of the fuzzy dynamical system scenario simulation for the
selected ve countries.

countries, the boundary value conditions for Model (13) for each
country were set at the same value, the deviation rate was set
at  = 0.1, and the cluster coefcient was selected as  = 0.50.
The initial value conditions for each country were determined
according to the estimated long-term net capital inow trends.
The simulation start time for each country was set at the year
the country rst suffered bonanzas before the nancial crisis
occurred. The results for the fuzzy dynamical system scenario
simulation for the selected ve countries are shown in Fig. 11
and compared with the historical long-term net capital inow
trends.

458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, APRIL 2017

The future work will focus on the following ve directions:
1) considering the comovements of the nancial contagion be-
tween multiple countries coupled through extensive nancial
connections and linkages; 2) extending the local theory of fuzzy
dynamical system scenario simulation to a global theory which
can be applied to wider range of situations; 3) exploring the
uncertainty of the nancial contagion more comprehensively by
employing the fuzzy-rough theory method; 4) considering the
time-delay effect of the response for the volatility-affected coun-
tries during a nancial shock; 5) analyzing the chaotic behavior
of the governments and nancial institutions in the dynamical
system model of the nancial system.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to appreciate the editors and anony-
mous referees for their helpful and constructive comments and
suggestions, which have helped to improve this article.

REFERENCES

[1] F. Schweitzer, G. Fagiolo, D. Sornette, F. Vega-Redondo, A. Vespignani,
and D. R. White, Economic networks: The new challenges, Science,
vol. 325, no. 5939, pp. 422425, 2009.

[2] Y. Leitner, Financial networks: Contagion, commitment, and private sec-

tor bailouts, J. Finance, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 29252953, 2005.

[3] P. Glasserman and B. P. Young, How likely is contagion in nancial

networks? J. Banking Finance, vol. 50, pp. 383399, 2015.

[4] G. Castellacci and Y. Choi, Financial instability contagion: A dynamical
systems approach, Quant. Finance, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 12431255, 2014.
[5] F. Allen and D. Gale, Financial contagion, J. Political Econ., vol. 108,

no. 1, pp. 133, 2000.

[6] S. Claessens and K. J. Forbes, Eds, International Financial Contagion.

New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2001.

[7] K. J. Forbes and R. Rigobon, Measuring contagion: Conceptual and
empirical issues, International Financial Contagion, S. Claessens and
K. J. Forbes. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2001.

[8] S. Claessens, R. Dornbusch, and Y. C. Park, Contagion: Why crises spread
and how this can be stopped? in International Financial Contagion,
S. Claessens and K. J. Forbes, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag,
2001.

[9] M. Pritsker, The channels for nancial contagion, in International Fi-
nancial Contagion, S. Claessens and K. J. Forbes, Eds. New York, NY,
USA: Springer-Verlag, 2001.

[10] M. Elliott, B. Golub, and M. O. Jackson, Financial networks and conta-

gion, Amer. Econ. Rev., vol. 104, no. 10, pp. 31153153, 2014.

[11] K. J. Forbes and F. E. Warnock, Capital ow waves: Surges, stops, ight,

and retrenchment, J. Int. Econ., vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 235251, 2012.

[12] M. Bordo and A. Murshid, Are nancial crises becoming more conta-
gious? What is the Historical Evidence on Contagion? in International
Financial Contagion, S. Claessens and K. J. Forbes, Eds. New York, NY,
USA: Springer-Verlag, 2001.

[13] M. Dungey, R. A. Fry, B. Gonzalez-Hermosillo, and V. Martin, Trans-
mission of Financial Crises and Contagion: A Latent Factor Approach.
New York, NY, USA: Oxford Univ. Press, 2010.

[14] N. Boyson, C. Stahel, and R. Stulz, Hedge fund contagion and liquidity

shocks, J. Finance, vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 17891816, 2010.

[15] K. H. Bae, G. A. Karolyi, and R. M. Stulz, A new approach to measuring
nancial contagion, Rev. Financial Stud., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 717763,
2003.

[16] D. Collins and S. Gavron, Channels of nancial market contagion, Appl.

Econ., vol. 36, no. 21, pp. 24612469, 2004.

[17] R. Dornbusch, Y. C. Park, and S. Claessens, Contagion: Understanding
how it spreads, World Bank Res. Obs., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 177197, 2000.
[18] C. Raddatz and S. L. Schmulder, On the international transmission
of shocks: Micro-evidence from mutual fund portfolios, J. Int. Econ.,
vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 357374, 2012.

[19] M. Melvin and B. P. Melvin, The global transmission of volatility in the
foreign exchange market, Rev. Econ. Statist., vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 670679,
2003.

[20] N. Nomikos and E. Salvador, The role of volatility regimes on volatil-
ity transmission patterns, Quant. Finance, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 113,
2014.

[21] H. H. Lee, C. Y. Park, and H. S. Byun, Do contagion effects exist in

capital ow volatility? J. Jpn. Int. Econ., vol. 30, pp. 7695, 2013.

[22] R. D. Vilag, G. H. Ionescu, M. D. Ungureanu, and I. Vasile, Contagion
causes-rational or irrational behavior, in Proc. Ind. Revolutions Glob-
alization Post-Globalization Perspect. Vol IV: Bank. Account. Financial
Syst. 21st Century Perspect., 2009, pp. 669678.

[23] S. Grifth-Jones, Stabilising capital ows to developing countries, IDS

Bull., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 3349, 1999.

[24] E. G. Mendoza and M. E. Terrones, An anatomy of credit booms: Evi-
dence from macro aggregates and micro data, Nat. Bureau Econom. Res.,
Working Paper 14049, 2008.

[25] C. M. Reinhart and V. R. Reinhart, Capital ow bonanzas: An encom-
passing view of the past and present, Nat. Bureau Econom. Res., Working
Paper 14321, 2008.

[26] R. J. Hodrick and E. C. Prescott, Postwar U.S. business cycles: An
investigation, J. Money Credit Banking, vol. 29, no. 1,

empirical
pp. 116, 1997.

[27] M. O. Ravn and H. Uhlig, On adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott lter for the
frequency of observations, Rev. Econ. Statist., vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 371376,
2002.

[28] R. Weron and M. Zator, A note on using the Hodrick-Prescott lter in

electricity markets, Energy Econ., vol. 48, pp. 16, 2015.

[29] L. Laeven and F. Valencia, Systemic banking crises database: An update,

IMF Working Paper 12/163, 2012.

[30] M. Fratzscher, Capital ows, push versus pull factors and the global

nancial crisis, J. Int. Econ., vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 341356, 2012.

[31] G. Fazio, Extreme interdependence and extreme contagion between
emerging markets, J. Int. Money Finance, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 12611291,
2007.

[32] E. T. Whittaker, On a new method of graduation, Proc. Edinburgh Math.

Soc., vol. 41, pp. 6375, 1922.

[33] L. A. Zadeh, The concept of a linguistic variable and its application to

approximate reasoning-1, Inf. Sci., vol. 8, pp. 199249, 1975.

[34] J. M. Mendel and X. W. Liu, Simplied interval type-2 fuzzy logic
systems, IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 10561069, Dec.
2013.

[35] J. M. Mendel and R. I. John, Type-2 fuzzy sets made simple, IEEE

Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 117127, Apr. 2002.

[36] R. R. Yager, Fuzzy Subsets of Type II in Decisions, J. Cybern., vol. 10,

nos. 13, pp. 137159, 1980.

[37] J. M. Mendel, R. I. John, and F. Liu, Interval type-2 fuzzy logic systems
made simple, IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 808821,
Dec. 2006.

[38] E. A. Jammeh, M. Fleury, C. Wagner, H. Hagras, and M. Ghanbari,
Interval type-2 fuzzy logic congestion control for video streaming across
IP networks, IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 11231142, Oct.
2009.

[39] J. M. Mendel and H. W. Wu, Type-2 fuzzistics for symmetric interval
type-2 fuzzy sets: Part 1, forward problems, IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst.,
vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 781792, Dec. 2006.

[40] J. M. Mendel and H. W. Wu, Type-2 fuzzistics for symmetric interval
type-2 fuzzy sets: Part 2, inverse problems, IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst.,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 301308, Apr. 2007.

[41] Y. Choi and R. Douady, Financial crisis dynamics: Attempt to dene a
market instability indicator, Quant. Finance, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 1351
1365, 2012.

[42] G. Castellacci and Y. Choi, Modeling contagion in the Eurozone crisis
via dynamical systems, J. Banking Finance, vol. 50, pp. 400410, 2015.
[43] W. S. Son and Y. J. Park, Delayed feedback on the dynamical model of a
nancial system, Chaos Solitons Fractals, vol. 44, nos. 4/5, pp. 208217,
2011.

[44] Z. H. Hu and W. Chen, Modeling of macroeconomics by a novel dis-
crete nonlinear fractional dynamical system, Discrete Dyn. Nature Soc.,
vol. 2013, p. 9, 2013, Art. no. 275134.

[45] B. Bede, I. J. Rudas, and A. L. Bencsik, First order linear fuzzy differential
equations under generalized differentiability, Inf. Sci., vol. 177, pp. 1648
1662, 2007.

[46] M. Chen, Y. Fu, X. Xue, and C. Wu, Two-point boundary value problems
of undamped uncertain dynamical systems, Fuzzy Sets Syst., vol. 159,
pp. 20772089, 2008.

[47] B. Chen and X. Liu, Reliable control design of fuzzy dynamical systems
with time-varying delay, Fuzzy Sets Syst., vol. 146, pp. 349374, 2004.

XU et al.: FUZZY DYNAMICAL SYSTEM SCENARIO SIMULATION-BASED CROSS-BORDER FINANCIAL CONTAGION ANALYSIS

459

[48] L. Hong and J. Sun, Bifurcations of fuzzy nonlinear dynamical systems,

Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simul., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 112, 2006.

[49] J. P. Xu, Z. G. Liao, and Z. N. Hu, A class of linear differential dynamical
systems with fuzzy initial condition, Fuzzy Sets Syst., vol. 158, no. 21,
pp. 23392358, 2007.

[50] J. P. Xu, Z. G. Liao, and J. J. Nieto, A class of linear differential dynam-
ical systems with fuzzy matrices, J. Math. Anal. Appl., vol. 368, no. 1,
pp. 5468, 2010.

[51] S. Arora and B. Barak, Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach.

London, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.

[52] D. K. Backus and P. J. Kehoe, International evidence on the historical
properties of business cycles, Amer. Econ. Rev., vol. 88, no. 4, pp. 864
888, 1992.

[53] I. H. Correia, J. L. Neves, and S. T. Rebelo, Business cycles from
1850C1950: New facts about old data, Eur. Econ. Rev., vol. 36, nos.
2/3, pp. 459467, 1992.

[54] T. J. Cooley and L. E. Ohanian, The cyclical behavior of prices, J.

Monetary Econ., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 2560, 1991.

[55] M. Baxter and R. King, Measuring business cycles: Approximate band-
pass lters for economic time series, Rev. Econ. Statist., vol. 81, no. 4,
pp. 575593, 1999.

[56] A. Iacobucci and A. Noullez, A frequency selective lter for short-length

time series, Comput. Econ., vol. 25, nos. 1/2, pp. 75102, 2005.

[57] R. F. Engle and C. W. J. Granger, Co-integration and error correction:
Representation, estimation, and testing, Econometrica, vol. 55, no. 2,
pp. 251276, 1987.

[58] A. C. Stockman and L. L. Tesar, Tastes and technology in a 2-country
model of the business cycle: Explainning international comovements,
Amer. Econ. Rev., vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 168185, 1995.

[59] R. M. Neumann, R. Penl, and A. Tanku, Volatility of capital ows and
nancial liberalization: Do specic ows respond differently? Int. Rev.
Econ. Finance, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 488501, 2009.

[60] H. W. Wu and J. M. Mendel, Uncertainty bounds and their use in the
design of interval type-2 fuzzy logic systems, IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst.,
vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 622639, Oct. 2002.

[61] D. R. Wu and J. M. Mendel, Enhanced KarnikMendel algorithms,

IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 923934, Aug. 2009.

[62] D. Kenourgios and D. Dimitriou, Contagion of the global nancial cri-
sis and the real economy: A regional analysis, Econ. Model., vol. 44,
pp. 283293, 2015.

[63] F. Brauer and C. Castillo-Chavez, Mathematical Models in Population
Biology and Epidemiology. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2001.
[64] T. Bendixson, Sus les courbes denies par des equations differentielles,

Acta Math., vol. 24, pp. 188, 1901.
[65] CEIC, Global Database, 2015.

ceicdata.com/en/products/global

[Online]. Available: http:/www.

Xinxin Xu (M15) received the Ph.D degree in eco-
nomics from Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, in
2014, and was a Visiting Scholar at National Univer-
sity of Singapore, Singapore, from 2012 to 2013.

She is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at Sichuan
University, and an Adjunct Distinguished Associate
Research Fellow with Chengdu University, Chengdu.
She received the General Program of China Postdoc-
toral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2015M572470)
and the research fund of Sichuan University (Grant
No. skzx2015-sb04) in 2015. Her research interests
include nancial engineering, macroeconomics, world economics, and dynam-
ical systems.

Dr. Xu is a Member of the IEEE Control Systems Society and a Member of

the IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Society.

Ziqiang Zeng (S11M15) received the B.S. de-
gree in applied mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in
management science and engineering from Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China, in 2009 and 2014, re-
spectively, and was a Visiting Scholar at the Univer-
sity of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA, from 2012 to
2013.

He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with Sichuan
University, and is supported by the China Postdoc-
toral Science Foundation to be a Postdoctoral Fellow
working with the University of Washington, Seattle,
WA, USA, from 2016 to 2018. He also acts as an Adjunct Distinguished As-
sociate Research Fellow at Chengdu University, Chengdu, China, since 2015.
He has published more than 20 peer-reviewed papers in international journals
and conferences, and two books by Springer and Sichuan University Press. He
received the Youth Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 71501137), the General Program of China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation (Grant No. 2015M572480) in 2015, the project of Research Center
for System Sciences and Enterprise Development (Grant No. Xq16B05) and the
research fund of Sichuan University (Grant No. skqy201647) in 2016. His cur-
rent research interest includes multistage decision making, nancial contagion,
fuzzy theory, and engineering optimization.

Dr. Zeng is a Member of the IEEE Control Systems Society, a Member of
the IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Society, and an Associate Member of
American Society of Civil Engineers.

Jiuping Xu (M11SM14) received the rst Ph.D.
degree in applied mathematics
from Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China, in 1995, and the second
Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China, in 1999.

He is currently a Distinguished Professor of
Chang Jiang Scholars Program with Sichuan Uni-
versity. He has published more than 40 books by
Springer, Taylor & Francis, and more than 400
international peer-reviewed journal papers in areas
of uncertainty decision making, systems engineer-
ing, economic theorem, and information science. His current research interests
include uncertainty decision making, nancial engineering, fuzzy dynamical
systems, and complex systems with applications.

Prof. Xu has been appointed as an Academician of the International Academy
of Systems and Cybernetic Sciences since 2010. He is also a Lifetime Academi-
cian of the Lot Zadeh International Academy of Sciences in recognition of
his contribution to the development of science and organization of scientic
forums since 2014. He is currently the President of the International Society for
Management Science and Engineering Management, the Vice President of the
Chinese Society of Optimization & Overall Planning and Economical Math-
ematics, and the Vice President of the Management Science and Engineering
Society of China. At present, He is a Member of the IEEE Control Systems
Society, a Member of the IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Society, and a
Member of the American Society of Civil Engineers.

Mengxiang Zhang (S14) received the B.S. and the
M.S. degrees in system science from Sichuan Univer-
sity, Chengdu, China, in 2012 and 2015, respectively,
where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. de-
gree in management science and engineering.

He has published several peer-reviewed papers in
international journals. His areas of research interests
mainly focus on dynamical system, uncertain deci-
sion making, and system engineering.

Mr. Zhang is a Member of the IEEE Control Sys-
tems Society and a Student Member of the American

Society of Civil Engineers.

