38

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 20, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016

A Genetic Bankrupt Ratio Analysis Tool Using

a Genetic Algorithm to Identify Inuencing

Financial Ratios

Travis Miranda Lakshmi, Aruldoss Martin, and Venkatasamy Prasanna Venkatesan

AbstractFinancial ratios are key constituents of bankruptcy
models. The bankruptcy prediction accuracy substantially
improves when a limited number of ratios are used. From the lit-
erature, it has been found that human expertise has been applied
to select nancial ratios for bankruptcy models. Different experts
tend to have different opinions and hence the bankruptcy predic-
tion results depend upon their competency levels in that domain.
Accordingly, there is a need for nding a systematic method
or a tool to identify the inuencing ratios. This paper develops
a genetic bankrupt ratio analysis tool using a genetic algorithm to
identify inuencing ratios from different bankruptcy models and
their inuences in a quantitative form. The accuracy of values of
inuencing ratios is validated by comparing original threshold
value of the bankruptcy models. The performance of inuencing
ratios has been compared with other feature selection techniques
and the Altman model is considered to explain the effect of the
inuencing ratios.

Index TermsBankruptcy models, bankruptcy prediction
inuencing ratios, quantitative

accuracy, genetic algorithm,
bankruptcy prediction, ratio analysis tool.

I. INTRODUCTION

S OFT computing techniques are applied successfully in the

nancial domain because of their tolerance for impre-
cision, uncertainty, and partial truth to achieve tractability,
robustness, and a low solution cost [1][3]. It is efciently
applied for bankruptcy prediction [4][7], currency crises [8],
budgetary allocations [9], credit rating [10], assessing bank
efciency [11], stock market [12], and many more areas.

In nancial decisions, bankruptcy prediction is the most
important issue that judges whether the business failure may
happen or not [7], [13], [14]. Hence, bankruptcy prediction
has been regarded as a critical issue and it is studied exten-
sively in the accounting and nance literature [15], [16]. Many
bankruptcy prediction models have been developed and each

Manuscript

received July 4, 2013;

revised December 16, 2013,
March 20, 2014,
June 8, 2014, and November 30, 2014; accepted
March 21, 2015. Date of publication April 17, 2015; date of current version
January 27, 2016.

T. M. Lakshmi is with the Research and Development Centre, Bharathiar

University, Coimbatore 641 046, India.

A. Martin is with the Department of Master of Computer Applications,
Sri Manakula Vinayagar Engineering College, Puducherry 605107, India
(e-mail: jayamartin@yahoo.com).

V. P. Venkatesan is with the Department of Banking Technology,

Pondicherry University, Puducherry 605014, India.

Color versions of one or more of the gures in this paper are available

online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

Digital Object Identier 10.1109/TEVC.2015.2424313

1089-778X c(cid:2) 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.

See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

of these models has a focal point that addresses the issues
related to bankruptcy prediction. The focal points addressed
in various models are nding the accuracy, the role of variables
(nancial variables and nonnancial variables), identifying the
types of failure, events that may affect the nancial situa-
tion of a rm (nonpayment of a debt, reduction of dividend
payments), and models on nal bankruptcy resolution (liqui-
dation, reorganization, and takeover). Bankruptcy prediction
models have selected nancial ratios from the previous liter-
ature or either using univariate statistical tests or data mining
techniques [17]. The ratios used in the prediction, form the
key constituents of these models [18][20] and they reect the
characteristics of stability, protability, growth, activity, and
cash ow of a business [22]. However, only limited bankruptcy
prediction models have attempted to assess the contribu-
tion of nancial ratios which affects the performance of a
model [23][26].

On the other hand, it was found that nearly 200 scientic
papers dealing with corporate failure prediction were pub-
lished in the last 50 years. More than 500 different ratios were
used in these models [17]. Despite the stability of the model
performance, the prediction accuracy of bankruptcy substan-
tially increases only when specic numbers of nancial ratios
are applied [27], [29], [30].

From the literature, it is evident that the ratios are selected
based on their competency levels in the eld. The selected
nancial ratios are key constituents to obtain the accurate
bankruptcy prediction results. Hence, a systematic method is
required to identify the effective nancial ratios for accurate
bankruptcy prediction.

The rest of

this paper has been organized as

fol-
lows. Section II describes the literature study. Section III
describes the details of bankruptcy models used in this
paper. Section IV describes the research proposal. Section V
describes the design principles of
the tool. Section VI
states the experimentation details and Section VII discusses
experimentation results. Section VIII discusses the accuracy
level of inuencing ratios. Section IX describes the per-
formance on inuencing ratios and Section X concludes
this paper.

II. LITERATURE REVIEW

The various techniques and methods which are adopted to
select the nancial ratios for bankruptcy prediction models,

LAKSHMI et al.: GBRAT USING A GENETIC ALGORITHM TO IDENTIFY INFLUENCING FINANCIAL RATIOS

39

TABLE I

BANKRUPTCY PREDICTION MODELS WITH

SELECTED AND APPLIED RATIOS

VARIOUS METHODS FOR FINANCIAL RATIO SELECTION

TABLE II

successfully to detect nancial fraud [24] and it is applied
successfully both in quantitative [25], [32][36] and qualita-
tive bankruptcy prediction [19], [22]. The hybrid of genetic
algorithm and neural network has shown the lowest misclas-
sication cost among other models [21], [31]. The genetic
programming [4], [29], [38], [39] based credit scoring result
was able to differentiate good and bad credits [10]. Further,
the ensembles of soft computing techniques have efciently
assessed the performance of a banking system [11]. The tem-
poral stock patterns are detected effectively in the stock
market for efcient trading using neural networks with genetic
algorithms [12]. Fuzzy analytic hierarchy process was applied
to solve a bank loan decision problem to nd a suitable degree
of fuzziness for preference rankings in budget allocation for
a business [9].

In this paper, we attempt to design and develop a genetic
bankrupt ratio analysis tool (GBRAT) using real-genetic algo-
rithm (RGA) [6] to nd the inuencing ratios. This genetic
tool analyses the nonlinear relationship among nancial ratios
of bankruptcy models and classies the ratios into inuencing
and noninuencing ratios.

III. BANKRUPTCY MODELS CONSIDERED FOR GBRAT
An inuencing ratio is a ratio which plays a key role to
obtain bankruptcy prediction accuracy among other nancial
ratios. Predominating bankruptcy models have been applied
by various rms to predict bankruptcy and the same have
been chosen in this paper to identify the inuencing ratios
using GBRAT. The bankruptcy models with accuracy levels of
more than 80% are selected and ranked and from which, the
top ve bankruptcy models are chosen for ratio analysis. The
selected models are Altman [55], Deakin [56], Edmister [57],
Springate [58], and Fulmer et al. [13]. In Table III, the details
of the chosen bankruptcy models are described.

All ratios fall under their specic ranges as specied
by [15]. Table III describes the selected bankruptcy mod-
els and their details, along with the specic range of each
of the ratios applied in the respective bankruptcy models.

the number of nancial ratios identied and selected by these
models are described in Table I.

From Table I, it is evident that in bankruptcy models, lim-
ited number of ratios are selected from the identied ratios.
This nancial ratio selection for bankruptcy prediction can be
classied under different methods. The ratio selection tech-
niques for bankruptcy models which are described in Table I
can be grouped into one of the four methods [17] which are
described in Table II. The foundations, nancial ratio selec-
tion techniques, along with the limitations, are also described
in Table II.

The methods listed in Table II help to select the ratios
for bankruptcy prediction models. From Tables I and II,
one can nd selected works in nding the inuencing ratios
implicitly along with their methods. Most nancial prob-
lems use hybrids of articial neural networks with other
soft computing techniques for decision making due to its
high learning ability [3]. Genetic algorithm has been applied

40

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 20, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016

SELECTED BANKRUPTCY MODELS WITH THEIR DETAILS

TABLE III

For example, the parameter details of Deakin model, with its
specied range, are described as follows. Net income (NI),
cash ratio (CR), and current liabilities (CL) should be greater
than 1,
total assets (TA) should be less than 1, current
assets (CA) should be greater than 2, and sales ratio (SR)
should be in positive range. The Deakin bankruptcy model
has 96% of accuracy in bankruptcy prediction. Deakin has
chosen six ratios out of the originally chosen 14 ratios.
Other bankruptcy models are also listed with their features
in Table III. The next section describes the research proposal.

IV. RESEARCH PROPOSAL

This paper pays attention to the design of GBRAT by using
the principles of RGA. From the literature, it has been found
that genetic algorithm has not been applied to identify the
inuencing nancial features from the bankruptcy models.
Hence, in this paper, we made an attempt to develop a tool
using genetic algorithm to identify the inuencing nancial
features. As GBRAT is designed using RGA, the offspring are
generated directly by substituting the values of ratios in the
bankruptcy equation. It studies and identies the most inu-
encing ratios from predominating bankruptcy models. GBRAT
uses bankruptcy model name, prediction accuracy, applied
ratios, and specied ranges of ratios as parameters. The details
of all these parameters are described in Table III for the cho-
sen ve bankruptcy models. The tool identies the inuencing
ratios by analyzing each ratios impact on the prediction model
by considering one (mutation) or more (crossover) ratios to
be active under its specic range [15], while xing the values
of the other ratios. The xed value is maintained through-
out the experiment until each parent completes the required
trials.

Each bankruptcy model has a bankruptcy prediction equa-
tion. A bankruptcy models cut-off value is assumed to be the
original threshold value. GBRAT generates the threshold value
for each ratio of the prediction models equation by applying
a value within its range for one ratio while keeping the values

of the other ratios xed. The threshold value which is gen-
erated by each offspring is called generated threshold value.
The nance ratios in the bankruptcy equation are assumed as
parents. By changing the characteristics of the parents within
its selection range, maximum number of offspring is generated
with threshold values for each selected bankruptcy model. The
difference between the original threshold value and the gener-
ated threshold value should be within the precision. This tool
identies those ratios which fall within the precision as the
most inuencing ratios. This real-genetic process is applied
to all bankruptcy models and the most inuencing ratios are
identied. The next section describes the design and working
principles of GBRAT.

V. DESIGN OF GENETIC BANKRUPT

RATIO ANALYSIS TOOL

Over the past 25 years, genetic algorithm is widely applied
to domains where precise models are impractical with vary-
ing resolutions and structures. They can search for nonlinear
information or
solution spaces without requiring gradient
a prior knowledge about model characteristics [32]. It
is
applied in various analysis models to identify the effective
parameters [36].

The RGA is one kind of simple genetic algorithm and it
directly codes the parameters of the problem space into chro-
mosomes without performing coding and encoding [6], [39].
This genetic process is used to analyze the nonlinear relation-
ship among nancial variables of a bankruptcy model and to
nd the most inuencing ratios. The genetic operators such as
mutation and crossover have been applied for offspring gen-
eration. The impact of generated offspring is validated with
other parents and from this process, most inuencing par-
ents are identied. While generating offspring for a parent,
(for example X1) the values of the other parents who are part
of this bankruptcy model are kept xed.

In the real-genetic process, the formation of offspring is
straight forward. The ratios (X) of the bankruptcy model with
its value and constants (c) are applied directly in the formation
of offspring which is represented in (1). A bankruptcy equation
consists of nancial ratios (X) with their constants (c), yield-
ing a threshold value called . Each bankruptcy model has
a bankrupt value, which is considered as the original thresh-
old value . For example, in Altman model the bankrupt value
is 2.675 which is considered as  in this genetic process.
Each nancial ratio X from the selected bankruptcy model
is considered a parent and it consists of nancial variables
namely A and B. The range of each nancial variable is dened
between m and n, where m is the starting range and n is the
ending range.

In the mutation process, according to the parent X, the nan-
cial variables and their ranges m and n are selected which is
represented in (2). The value of a ratio between its range is
considered as a characteristic of a parent. For example, con-
sider the parent X1, the starting value of each nancial variable
is selected between its selection range m and n in the process
of forming the rst offspring. While generating the second
offspring from parent X1, the next value of the ratio within

LAKSHMI et al.: GBRAT USING A GENETIC ALGORITHM TO IDENTIFY INFLUENCING FINANCIAL RATIOS

41

its range is selected and this process is repeated until the
maximum number of offspring is generated. In this process,
each offspring is generated with threshold value  from (2).
The offspring, which are generated using mutation and
crossover, are selected and discarded using the tness func-
tion f (x) represented in (4). The generated threshold value  of
each offspring is compared with the original threshold value .
The difference between  and  should be in between the
precision of (1). The precision (1) indicates the maximum
difference between the original threshold value  and the gen-
erated threshold value . Those offspring which stand within
the precision from (4) are assumed to be the members of the
set P and other offspring are discarded. The parents of the
selected offspring from set P are considered to be the most
inuencing ratios. The above said process is repeated for other
parents X available in the bankruptcy model to nd the most
inuencing ratios.

In this genetic process, simple pair crossover (a type of
crossover) is applied. In the process of crossover, the character-
istics of two parents are taken. For example, nancial variables
with their values within m and n from parents X1 and X2 are
taken and offspring  is generated from (3) using the same
steps. This process is applied for all the parents with sim-
ple pair. The working model of GBRAT is described by the
pseudo code explained in the next section.

A. Pseudo Code for Genetic Bankrupt Ratio Analysis Tool

The GBRAT is designed using RGA. The following pseu-

docode explains the working model of real-genetic process.

Step 1: Search space  the top ve bankruptcy models
with accuracy levels of more than 80% are chosen
for genetic operation.

Step 2: Each nancial ratio has its specic range between
m and n (m  starting selection range, n  ending
selection range). The value of a ratio is taken
between its specic range.

Step 3: Each bankruptcy model has a bankrupt value,
threshold

which is considered as the original
value .

Step 4: Each nancial ratio X in the bankruptcy model
is considered as a parent. In this genetic process,
a bankruptcy equation is a collection of parents
(X1, X2, X3, . . . , XN).

Step 5: Formation of bankruptcy equation

(1)

 = c1X1 + c2X2 + c3X3 +  + cNXN
threshold value of
where,   original
the
respective bankruptcy model, c1, c2, c3, . . . , cN 
constants
each ratio from the
bankruptcy equation offspring are generated and
each offspring is generated with threshold value
called as .

applied for

Step 6: Offspring Generation: Operators Applied 
In
Mutation
a bankruptcy equation, one of
the parents
(X1, X2, X3, . . . , XN ) is mutated between m and n

Crossover Mutation:

and

the other parents are
whereas the values of
kept xed (this value is maintained until
the
completion of the respective trial conducted for
each parent) between m and n and this process
is repeated until all the parents have undergone
mutation

 = [c1X1(Am...n/Bm...n)]

+ [c2X2(Am...n/Bm...n)]
+ [c3X3(Am...n/Bm...n)] + 
+ [cNXN(Am...n/Bm...n)]

(2)

where, X1, . . . , XN  parents of bankruptcy equa-
tion, A and B  nancial variables of parent X,
m  starting selection range, n  ending selection
range.
Crossover: In the process of crossover, character-
istics of two parents are taken and offspring are
formed using simple pair until all the parents have
undergone crossover
 = c1X1

Am..n/Bm..n

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
Am..n/Bm..n
(cid:2)
+ c3X3
Am..n/Bm..n
(cid:2)
+ cNXN
Am..n/Bm..n

(cid:3) + c2X2
(cid:2)
(cid:3) + 
(cid:3)

.

(3)

Step 7:

Selection and Discarding of Offspring: The off-
spring which is generated using mutation and
crossover is selected or discarded using the tness
function f(x)

f (x) =    <= (1) (4)
Fitness function:
where, x  generated offspring, (1)  precision
range.

Step 8: P is a selected offspring set and x1, x2, x3, . . . , xn
are the members of the set P when precision range
of x stands between (1).

Step 9: The parent (X) of the selected offspring (x) present
in the set P is considered as most inuencing ratio.
the parents have

this process until all

Step 10: Repeat

undergone mutation and crossover.

The pseudo code explains the working principle of the
genetic process. In this process, selection range and preci-
sion are dened on the basis of relative error with selec-
tion range. Selection range of an offspring  is dened
between m and n. It makes the generated offspring fall within
the range of m and n. The precision for offspring is dened
between 1. It minimizes the error rate of offspring selection
and discard. The next section explains the experimentation
details of the genetic process.

VI. EXPERIMENTATION DETAILS

GBRAT is coded using Java to conduct the experiments.
It takes bankruptcy model, prediction accuracy, applied ratios,
and their specied range as parameters to identify the inu-
encing ratios.

42

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 20, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016

In mutation operation, one of the ratios is mutated within
its specic range while the values of the other ratios are kept
xed as represented in (2). For example, Altman bankruptcy
model has ve ratios, in which the ratio X1 is mutated within
its specic range for 1000 trials and remaining four ratios
are kept with xed value. All the ratios X1 to X5 with their
respective values have been substituted in Altman equation (5).
Offspring is generated for each trial with the threshold value
 from (5).

the nancial

According to the ranges of nancial ratios and the combi-
nation among ranges, a number of offspring are generated.
For example, consider
ratio working capi-
tal (WC),
its ratio range is (1.0 > WC < 2.0). While
generating offspring the value lies between its limit (1.0, 1.10,
1.11, 1.12, 1.13, 1.14, . . . , 1.20, 1.30, 1.40, . . . , 2.0). When
we apply mutation with different combinations of this range,
it generates more offspring. To limit it, we have generated
1000 offspring for each ratio. Each model has 1000 trials for
each ratio. According to the number of parents, a number of
trials are applied. In the process of mutation, those parents
who are not mutated remain with their initial values between
their specic ranges.

The algorithm compares the precision from (4) of this gener-
ated threshold () value with the original threshold value ().
The offspring within the precision is selected by GBRAT as the
inuencing ratio. The same mutation process is experimented
for the next ratio and this genetic process is repeated until
the selection of all parents of the bankruptcy model by the
mutation operator. In this genetic process, simple pair crossover
is applied. In the process of crossover, the characteristics of
two parents are taken. For example, nancial ratios with their
m and n from parents X1 and X2 are taken and offspring are
generated from (3) using the steps indicated in the pseudo code.
This process is applied for all the parents with simple pair.

Similarly, the GBRAT completes 1000 trials for each ratio
in the respective bankruptcy models. For Deakin model, the
total number of trials performed is 5000 whereas Springate
model has 4000 trials, Edmister model has 7000 trials, and
Fulmer model has 9000 trials. The results of these experi-
ments conducted using GBRAT will be discussed in the next
section.

VII. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Five different bankruptcy models have been considered for
the analysis and identication of the most inuencing ratios
using GBRAT. Mutation and crossover operators have been
applied on each selected model and the results are discussed
in the following sections.

A. Analysis of Altman Bankruptcy Model Ratios

The bankruptcy equation of Altman bankruptcy model is
Z = 0.012X1 + 0.014X2 + 0.033X3 + 0.006X4 + 0.999X5
(5)
where X1 = WC/TA, X2 = retained earnings/TA, X3 =
earnings before interest and taxes/TA, X4 = market value
liabilities, X5 = sales/TA,
of equity/book value of total
Z = Altman bankrupt value.

1) Process

of Mutation

The performance of any business is assessed based on
the value of Z. That is, when the value of Z is less than
2.675, Altman prediction would lead to bankruptcy, otherwise
it assures the better performance of business. The process of
mutation using GBRAT for Altman model is explained below.
and Offspring Generation:
Mutation is a process of creating offspring by chang-
ing the characteristics within a parent. By mutating each
parent X in the Altman bankruptcy equation, maximum
number of offspring are generated with threshold values
(1, 2, 3, . . . , n). The ratio X1, WC to TA, is considered
as a parent. Let 1 (2.675) be the threshold value of this
bankruptcy model.

The WC and TA are assigned initial values within their
specied ranges as described in Table III. The remaining
ratios X2, X3, X4, and X5 are assigned xed values within
their specied ranges. During mutation one of the parents
is mutated and the other parents are not changed. The par-
ents who are not mutated have been assigned xed values
within the specic ranges of their nancial ratios. These values
are maintained throughout the experiment until the comple-
tion of all the trials conducted for the mutated parent. Now
GBRAT generates offspring with threshold value 1 by sub-
stituting X1,X2, X3, X4, and X5 in (5). The generated threshold
value 1 is compared with the original threshold value 1.
Table IV describes the generated offspring with their threshold
values.

In Table IV, different colors are used to differentiate the
mutated parents and their offspring from the other parents.
From iteration 848 to 918, the offspring TA and WC of X1 is
mutated which is indicated by lighter red. The result of parent
X1 after mutation is indicated by darker orange. Likewise, from
iteration 748 to 841, parent X2 is mutated which is indicated
by olive green. The output of X2 after mutation is indicated by
darker orange. Similarly different colors are used to denote the
mutated parent and its offspring. While performing mutation
on parent X4, the value of X4 is changed whereas the values
of the other parents X1, X2, X3, and X5 are not changed, which
are indicated by light blue color.

In the real-genetic mutation process, 1000 offspring are gen-
erated with threshold value for each parent. The following
section explains the identication of inuencing ratios from
the generated offspring (refer to Table IV).

2) Identication of Inuencing Ratios: When we change
the characteristics of X1 (WC to TA),
the offspring 848
reaches a threshold value of 2.92 with TA = 0.40, WC = 1.30,
retained earnings = 1.10, earnings before interest and
taxes = 1.10, market value of equity = 1.10, book value
of total liabilities = 1.10, and sales = 1.10. The difference
between this threshold value and that of Altman bankruptcy
model stands within the specied precision (1). As such, the
ratio X1 is considered as the inuencing ratio. In Table IV,
the ratio X1 (WC and TA) is mutated while the values of
the remaining ratios X2, X3, X4, and X5 are not changed.
The parents who are not mutated are assigned xed values
within the specic ranges of the ratios and these values will
be maintained until the completion all the trials conducted
for X1.

LAKSHMI et al.: GBRAT USING A GENETIC ALGORITHM TO IDENTIFY INFLUENCING FINANCIAL RATIOS

43

OFFSPRING GENERATION USING MUTATION FOR ALTMAN

TABLE IV

Fig. 1. Genetic ratio analysis for Altman model (mutation).

Likewise, when mutation is performed on X4, the values
of all other parents do not change. This is because, the par-
ent X4 consists of terms such as market value of equity to
book value of total liabilities which are not part of any par-
ent. A similar study has been carried out for the remaining
ratios and found that X1, X2, X3, and X5 are inuencing ratios
whereas X4 is not an inuencing ratio as its offspring do not
fall within the precision.

3) Ratio Analysis Graph for Altman Model: Amongst
1000 offspring, a randomly selected 15 offspring have been
considered and the relation between the reference value 1
and the experimental value  of each offspring is represented
in the graph shown in Fig. 1. The differences between 1 and 
for the 15 offspring are shown in Fig. 1. Those offspring which
stands within the precision become the members of set P and
are considered to be the most inuencing ratios.

The graph indicates that most of the generated offsprings
threshold values match the original threshold values for par-
ents X1, X2, X3, and X5. Accordingly, precision for  and 
of parents X1, X2, X3, and X5 are within the error rate. In
this experimentation, for X4, the precision of the generated
offspring is not within the error rate and it is discarded by
GBRAT. The experimental results indicate that the nancial
ratios X1, X2, X3, and X5 have higher inuence than X4 in the
Altman bankruptcy model.

4) Impact of

During the experimentation, in iteration 904 (904) and
905 (905), the values of the ratios X2, X3, and X5 change
as well. The reason is that X1 consists of the term TA, which
also appears in X2, X3, and X5. Hence, a change in X1 will
also affect the other ratios which contain TA as part of the
nancial variable.

Similarly, when parent X2 (retained earnings to TA) is
mutated within the specic range of the ratio, offspring 749
is generated with a threshold value of 2.34. The generated
offspring 749 which stands within the precision considered
an inuencing ratio. During the experimentation, in iteration
749 and its iterations, all ratios, except X4, are changed. The
reason is that except X4, all other parents have TA as part of
their ratio.

the Larger Constant

in Formation and
Rejection of Offspring: In this model, each ratio is associated
with a constant and when compared to other ratios, X5 has
a larger constant. A small mutation from X5s original value
will easily give a big deviation of  from the value of , which
makes it a noninuencing ratio. We have made careful anal-
ysis to understand the impact of larger constants on mutation
results to identify the inuencing ratio. The mutation results
of X5 have been described in Table V.

The precision range is checked for generated offspring
from (5) using the tness function. The offspring which
are generated during iterations 1148, 1149, 1150, 1151, and
1158 fall under the precision range (6). Hence, these offspring
are selected and the nancial ratio X5 has been considered

44

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 20, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016

IMPACT OF LARGER CONSTANT IN MUTATION PROCESS

TABLE V

OFFSPRING GENERATION USING CROSSOVER FOR ALTMAN MODEL

TABLE VI

Fig. 2. Genetic ratio analysis for Altman model (crossover).

offspring have been considered. The relation between the ref-
erence value 1 and the experimental value  of each offspring
is represented as a graph in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2 shows a higher difference between the original thresh-
old value and the generated threshold value (not falling within
the precision range) for each offspring. Hence, the crossover
operation has not contributed to identifying any inuencing
ratio using GBRAT.

B. Analysis of Deakin Bankruptcy Model Ratios

The bankruptcy equation of Deakin model is given by
I = 1.369 + 13.855X1 + 0.060X2  0.601X3

+ 0.396X4 + 0.194X5

(6)
where X1 = NI/TA, X2 = CA/TA, X3 = cash/TA, X4 =
CA/CL, X5 = sales/CA, I = overall index (Deakin bankrupt
value).

as an inuencing nancial ratio. Other than these offspring,
all are discarded according to (4). The experimental results
indicate that despite the higher constant, X5 is able to produce
offspring within the precision range.

5) Process of Crossover and Offspring Generation: The
crossover is an operation performed to generate offspring by
taking characteristics from the parents X1 and X2 using simple
pair and specifying values within the ranges for X3, X4, and X5.
The generated offspring with their threshold values have been
listed in Table VI.

The threshold value of the offspring  is compared with
the original threshold value 1 in (4). The precision of each
offspring generated for parents of Altman model is more than
the error rate. In this crossover operation, GBRAT has not
selected any offspring as a member of the set P and therefore
it has not considered any ratio as inuencing ratio. Amongst
1000 offspring of the ratios X1 and X2, a randomly selected ten

For any given business, the value of the bankruptcy predic-
tion variable I of the Deakin model should be greater than or
equal to 1.5. Otherwise, it indicates that the business is likely
to bankrupt.

1) Process of Mutation and Identication of Inuencing
In this model, mutation is applied to the ratio X1
Ratios:
where its nancial variables are NI to TA. A random value is
assigned to X1 within its specic range for initial population.
Let 2 (1.5) be the threshold value of this bankruptcy model. In
Table VII, the offspring with their generated threshold values 
are shown.

The generated offspring 2388 has a threshold value of 3.05
(refer to Table VII) and it is compared with the original thresh-
old value 2. This offspring is discarded as the difference
is more than the precision. On the other hand, while apply-
ing GBRAT to parent X3(cash to TA), the generated offspring
2390 has a threshold value of 1.71. The difference between
2 and 2390 is 0.28 which is within the precision and hence
selected as a member of the set P. A similar study has been
carried out for the remaining ratios and found that X3 is the
only inuencing ratio and other ratios X1, X2, X4, and X5 are
noninuencing ratios.

2) Ratio Analysis Graph for Deakin Model: The thresh-
old values of the generated offspring for parent X3 in Deakin

LAKSHMI et al.: GBRAT USING A GENETIC ALGORITHM TO IDENTIFY INFLUENCING FINANCIAL RATIOS

45

OFFSPRING GENERATION USING MUTATION PROCESS FOR DEAKIN

OFFSPRING GENERATION USING CROSSOVER PROCESS FOR DEAKIN

TABLE VII

TABLE VIII

OFFSPRING GENERATION USING MUTATION PROCESS FOR SPRINGATE

TABLE IX

Fig. 3. Genetic ratio analysis for Deakin model.

model are compared with  and the differences are represented
in the graph in Fig. 3.

From Fig. 3, it is observed that only limited offspring have

reached the precision of the original threshold value 2.

3) Process of Crossover and Offspring Generation: The
offspring with their generated threshold values are listed in
Table VIII when crossover is operated using GBRAT for
Deakin model.

In this model, GBRAT also discarded all offspring generated
using crossover as there is a higher deviation in the generated
threshold values.

C. Analysis of Springate Bankruptcy Model Ratios

The bankruptcy equation of the Springate model is

Z = 1.03A + 3.07B + 0.66C + 0.4D

(7)

where A-WC/TA, B-net prot before interest and taxes/TA,
C-net prot before taxes/CL, D-sales/TA, and Z-Springate
bankrupt value.

For any given business, the value of the bankruptcy predic-
tion variable Z of the Springate model should be greater than
or equal to 0.865. A value lower than 0.865, indicates that the

Fig. 4. Genetic ratio analysis for Springate model.

business is likely to bankrupt. The genetic operators such as
mutation and crossover have been applied to the ratios A, B, C,
and D of the Springate model and the offspring with thresh-
old values  have been generated. The threshold values of the
generated offspring have been listed in Table IX for mutation
process. From the comparison of threshold values, the ratio A
alone has been identied as an inuencing ratio and the other

46

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 20, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016

OFFSPRING GENERATION USING MUTATION PROCESS FOR EDMISTER

OFFSPRING GENERATION USING MUTATION PROCESS FOR FULMER

TABLE X

TABLE XI

Fig. 5. Genetic ratio analysis for Edmister model.

ratios have been discarded. The differences between the origi-
nal and experimental threshold values are shown in Fig. 4 for
Springate model.

D. Analysis of Edmister Bankruptcy Model Ratios

Edmister developed a seven variable, zero one linear regres-
the

sion equation, which gives the bankruptcy value of
Edmister model as
Z = 0.951  0.523X1  0.293X2  0.482X3 + 0.277X4
 0.452X5  0.352X6  0.924X7

(8)
where X1 = annual funds to CL, X2 = equity to sales,
X3 = net WC to sales, divided by RMA average ratio (average
ratios for rms), X4 = CL to equity, divided by RMA aver-
age ratio, X5 = inventory to sales, divided by RMA average
ratio, X6 = quick ratio divided by the trend in RMA quick
ratio, X7 = quick ratio divided by RMA quick ratio, and
Z = Edmister variable.
In this model, the minimum threshold value of an offspring
should be 0.530. A threshold value lower than 0.530, indi-
cates that the business is likely to bankrupt. The methodology
used in the previous models has been applied to all the ratios
and it is found that X1, X2, and X4 are inuencing ratios and
X3, X5, X6, and X7 are noninuencing ratios in the mutation
process. The threshold values of different offspring for the
ratios X1, X2, and X4 are given in Table X.

Fig. 6. Genetic ratio analysis for Fulmer model.

In the mutation process, the ratios X1, X2, and X4, which
have more offspring reaching within the precision range, are
shown in Fig. 5.

E. Analysis of Fulmer Bankruptcy Model Ratios
The Fulmer bankruptcy model takes the form
H = 5.528(V1) + 0.212(V2) + 0.073(V3) + 1.270(V4)

 0.120(V5) + 2.335(V6) + 0.575(V7) + 1.083(V8)
+ 0.894(V9)  6.075
(9)
where V1 = retained earning/TA, V2 = sales/TA,
V3 = EBT/equity, V4 = cash ow/total debt, V5 = debt/TA,
V6 = CL/TA, V7 = log tangible TA, V8 = WC/total debt,
V9 = EBIT/interest, and H = Fulmer bankrupt variable.
For any given business, the original threshold value 5 of
Fulmer model is 0. A threshold value lower than the original
threshold value indicates that the business is likely to fail.
Table XI lists the offspring generated in the genetic mutation
ratio analysis.

In this process, the offspring 459 generated for the ratio V5
tends to stand within the precision of 5 and the results are
shown in Fig. 6. Hence, the ratio V5 is considered to be the
inuencing ratio whereas the offspring generated for the other
ratios of this model do not have any impact on 5 and are dis-
carded by GBRAT. Fig. 6 shows that most of the offspring for

LAKSHMI et al.: GBRAT USING A GENETIC ALGORITHM TO IDENTIFY INFLUENCING FINANCIAL RATIOS

47

INFLUENCING RATIOS OF BANKRUPTCY MODELS

INFLUENCING RATIO ACCURACY LEVEL COMPARISON

TABLE XII

TABLE XIII

parent V5 have reached within the precision and they belong
to the set P.

As we have considered in Altman and Deakin models, the
crossover operation has been employed to the remaining three
models Springate, Edmister, and Fulmer. In this genetic pro-
cess, offspring which are generated using crossover do not
fall within the precision range given in (4). The crossover
is performed between two completely different ratios, such
as between WC/TA and market value of equity/book value
of total liabilities. Parents with different characteristics are
involved in the crossover. Hence, the resultant offspring do not
fall within the precision range and do not have any effect in
identifying inuencing ratios. In all these ve bankruptcy mod-
els, the effect of crossover is minimal and it is not able to help
the GBRAT to nd the inuencing ratios. The next section dis-
cusses the results of the experiments conducted using GBRAT
to identify the inuencing ratios in the models considered for
the study.

the most

in the analysis of

VIII. ACCURACY LEVELS OF INFLUENCING RATIOS
When we change the characteristics of a parent X (through
mutation)
inuencing ratios
using GBRAT, the resultant threshold value of the generated
offspring  has impact on the original threshold value  of
the respective bankruptcy model. Accordingly, the parent of
the offspring which falls within the precision is considered to
be inuencing ratio in the models which are studied to identify
the inuencing ratios. In this GBRAT experiment, the muta-
tion process has a greater impact in identifying the inuencing
ratios. The inuencing ratios obtained using GBRAT for all
the ve models in this paper are given in Table XII.

From Altman model given in (5), one can nd the perfor-
mance of a business using only the most inuencing ratios
X1, X2 X3, and X5. Deakin model given in (6) is suggested
for those who want to assess the nancial status of a business
with cash and TA (X3) which is the only most inuencing ratio
in this model. From Table XII, Springate model represented
in (7) is the best model to measure the business nancial crisis
using WC and TA. The most inuencing ratios of Edmister
model given in (8) are X1, X2, and X4 which can be used to
nd the nancial stability of a business. It is also observed that
V5 is the only most inuencing ratio in Fulmer model given
in (9) to predict the bankruptcy of a business.

Fig. 7.

Inuencing ratios accuracy level.

It is observed that the TA is a key nancial variable in
designing a bankruptcy model as it is an inuencing ratio
in all the models. Similarly, Deakin, Springate, and Fulmer
model have only one inuencing ratio whereas the other mod-
els have more than two. Hence, these models can be used to
reduce computational time and complexity. Amongst the ve
models considered for the study, Altman, Deakin, Springate,
and Fulmer models are designed based on TA whereas the
Edmister model is inuenced by CL.

The results of inuencing ratios are validated by comparing
the original threshold values of bankruptcy models with the
average impacted threshold values. In Table XIII, the orig-
inal threshold values  and the average impacted threshold
values  for each bankruptcy model have been compared and
their accuracy levels are listed out.

From Table XIII, it is found that accuracy levels of more
than 83% are maintained in all the models. In particular, the
Altman, Springate, and Fulmer models have accuracy levels
higher than 95%. Moreover, in Altman model, all inuencing
ratios, except X5, maintain accuracy levels of more than 95%.
Deakin and Edmister models have accuracy levels higher than
85%. The diagrammatic representation of the high coincidence
levels of most inuencing ratios is given in Fig. 7.

In its present form, GBRAT has computed the average
impacted threshold value from the offspring that falls within
the precision. The inuencing ratio accuracy level compari-
son results have been described in Table XIII. The average
impacted threshold value can be computed in different ways

48

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 20, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016

TABLE XIV

TOP FIVE OFFSPRING OF ALTMAN AND THEIR

ACCURACY LEVEL COMPARISON

TABLE XV

EXPERIMENTATION DETAILS ON FINDING PREDICTION

ACCURACY WITH CBR

to nd the accuracy between  and . It helps to nd the
robustness of the selected inuencing ratio of a particular
bankruptcy model. To carry out this computation, both selected
and discarded offspring can be taken in different combinations.
For example, consider Altman model, in which the top ve
rated offspring are taken with their precision to nd the
accuracy between  and  described in Table XIV.

From the experimentation results (refer to Table XIV), it is
found that the accuracy levels of X1, X2, and X3 are high when
it is compared to X5. One of the reasons found for the differ-
ence between X5 and the other inuencing ratios is that the
larger constant associated with X5 has inuenced the genera-
tion of offspring within the precision. Similarly, the selection
and discarding of offspring of different parents of various
bankruptcy models are inuenced by different factors. Some
of the factors are as follows:
1) the kinds of ratios taken for bankruptcy analysis;
2) the combination of ratios (for e.g., X1 = WC/TA and

X2 = retained earnings/TA);

3) the impact of one ratio with respect to another ratio;
4) the constant associated with each of the ratios.
This paper has identied the above said factors and more
factors can be identied in its extended version. The impact
of the above said factors and the robustness of the inu-
encing ratios can be analyzed with different combinations of
offspring. Some of the combinations are listed as follows:

1) offspring that fall within the precision alonepresently

carried out in GBRAT;

2) combination of offspring (both selected and discarded);
3) discarded offspring alone;
4) selected offspring with different combinations (when
50 offspring are selected for analysis, when 100 offspring
are selected, when 500 offspring are selected for the
analysis with different kinds of combinations);

5) the particular moment

(between the ratio range:
1.0, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, . . . , 2.0) in which a larger number of
offspring are generated.

In order to check the robustness of the inuencing ratios, the
above said combinations of the offspring should be generated.
This will require extensive analysis which will be carried out
in the extended version of GBRAT. The next section validates
the performance of inuencing ratios.

IX. PERFORMANCE OF INFLUENCING

FINANCIAL FEATURES

To analyze the performance of inuencing ratios, a com-
parative study has been conducted to nd the bankruptcy
prediction accuracy using inuencing ratios with other feature
selection techniques. In addition to this analysis, this section

also analyses the effect of the inuencing nancial features
in the bankruptcy models. For this analysis, Altman model is
considered to explain the effect of the inuencing nancial
features.

X. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS ON BANKRUPTCY
PREDICTION ACCURACY USING INFLUENCING

FINANCIAL FEATURES

To analyze the performance of inuencing nancial features,
they have been applied to predict bankruptcy. The prediction
accuracy obtained using nancial features has been compared
with those obtained using other feature selection techniques.
To obtain bankruptcy prediction accuracy, case-based rea-
soning (CBR) has been selected. It is a machine learning
technique which solves a new problem based on the past expe-
riences. It is more efcient since it provides prediction along
with explanation. The CBR prediction performance depends
on the feature selection technique and the case retrieval algo-
rithm. In this experiment, GBRAT has been considered as
feature selection technique and the k-nearest neighbor algo-
rithm has been selected for case retrieval. The experimentation
details about nding the bankruptcy prediction accuracy using
the inuencing features identied by GBRAT with CBR are
described in Table XV.

Protg (3.4.7) with myCBR (plug-in) is selected as the
CBR tool and data sets are taken from Prowess database
from 1997 to 2008 to conduct the experiment. Each case has
been represented using inuencing features in CBR and simple
CBR has been considered for the experiment. The bankruptcy
prediction accuracy obtained with inuencing features using
CBR has been compared with the bankruptcy prediction accu-
racy obtained using other feature selection techniques. The
details about various feature selection methods, identied fea-
tures, and selected features of these methods are described in
Table XVI.

The bankruptcy prediction accuracy results obtained using
CBR with different feature selection techniques have been
depicted in Fig. 8. Genetic algorithm with CBR has selected
15 nancial features and it gives a prediction accuracy of
86.73% whereas decision trees have selected 15 nancial fea-
tures which give a prediction accuracy of 87.20%. GBRAT
has selected eight nancial features and it gives a prediction

LAKSHMI et al.: GBRAT USING A GENETIC ALGORITHM TO IDENTIFY INFLUENCING FINANCIAL RATIOS

49

DETAILS OF FEATURE SELECTION METHODS APPLIED IN CBR

Z-SCORE VALUES OF ALTMAN MODEL FOR RECOVERED BANKS

TABLE XVI

TABLE XVII

inuencing ratio in Altman bankruptcy model. The same veri-
cation process is also applied to the recovered banks and the
same is reported in Table XVII.

In this verication, X4 also does not have considerable value
when compared to the other nancial variables as illustrated
in Table XVII. During the period 19972008, these recovered
banks are almost in bankrupt status. Thus, the experimenta-
tion results indicate that in the Altman bankruptcy model, the
nancial variables X1, X2, X3, and X5 are most inuencing
ratios. Therefore, GBRAT can be used by any one working
with bankruptcy models to nd the most inuencing ratios.
In GBRAT, it is obvious to call the whole vector (X1, X2,
X3, and X4) as parent when N = 4. The genetic operators such
as mutation (X1, X2, X3, and X4) and crossover (X1, X2, X3,
and X4) (Y1, Y2, Y3, and Y4) can be applied to this parent to
nd the inuencing ratios. In crossover, offspring are formed
using simple pair. In the process of mutation, if we change
the values of (X2, . . . , XN), the value x for X1 may not lead to
the precision range, so x is not considered as an inuencing
ratio. When we assume the whole vector (X1, X2, X3, and X4)
as parent, the parent X1 is changed and then the other ratios
(X2, . . . , XN) are also changed. In its present form, GBRAT
has given impressive results in mutation and these results sug-
gested more condence to choose this methodology. Hence,
we have applied this methodology to bankruptcy models and
inuencing ratios are identied according to the experimental
results. In extension of the present work, this methodology is
modied to consider the whole vector as a parent to identify
the inuencing ratios.

XII. CONCLUSION

The GBRAT has been developed to nd the inuencing
ratios for bankruptcy models. The tool has been applied to ve
different models and the most inuencing ratios are identied
by generating sizeable number of offspring for each ratio of
the models considered for the study. The two genetic operators
such as mutation and crossover have been applied to generate
the offspring. In the process of mutation, we are mutating one
parent at a time. Similarly, while performing mutation to the
next parent, the previously mutated parent and the other par-
ents are not mutated. Crossover is performed on two different
parents having nonlinear relationship with simple pair.

Fig. 8. CBR and feature selection techniques.

accuracy of 89.75% which is higher than those obtained by
the other feature selection techniques applied in simple CBR.
This CBR-bankruptcy prediction method has used inuenc-
ing ratios as input variables. The prediction accuracy of this
method is better than previous methods and it has selected
relatively limited features (eight) compared to other methods.

XI. EFFECT OF THE INFLUENCING

FINANCIAL FEATURES

The ratios which are identied as inuencing ratios from
each bankruptcy model should be veried and justied that
they are really inuencing ratios. For this verication process,
Altman bankruptcy models most inuencing ratios are taken
as a test case. Altman model is applied in successful banks
and recovered (merged) banks of India between the period
19972008 to verify the impact of the most inuencing ratios.
In this analysis, it is observed that the nancial variable
X4 has a lower value compared to the other nancial vari-
ables such as X1, X2, X3, and X5. Moreover, the same variable
X4 does not have inuence on the threshold value () when
the analysis was made using GBRAT. During the period
19972008, these banks are very successful though X4 has
less value. Accordingly, it indicates that X4 is not the most

50

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 20, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2016

It has been observed that the inuencing ratios can be
obtained in all the models using only the mutation process.
The inuencing ratios obtained using GBRAT in all the models
were validated with the original threshold values of the respec-
tive bankruptcy models. The performance of the inuencing
ratios are validated with CBR. The bankruptcy prediction
accuracy of the inuencing ratios are higher than those of
the other feature selection techniques which are applied in
CBR. In order to analyze the effect of inuencing ratios,
Altman model is considered and it has been validated with
successful and recovered banks. In this analysis, the perfor-
mance of business has been decided by inuencing ratios
despite the performance of noninuencing ratio. Accordingly,
one can condently use the proposed genetic algorithm to nd
the inuencing ratios for other bankruptcy models.

REFERENCES

[1] M. D. Fethi and F. Pasiouras, Assessing bank efciency and perfor-
mance with operational research and articial intelligence techniques:
A survey, Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 204, no. 2, pp. 189198, 2010.

[2] H. Huang, M. Pasquier, and C. Quek, Financial market trading system
with a hierarchical coevolutionary fuzzy predictive model, IEEE Trans.
Evol. Comput., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 5670, Feb. 2009.

[3] A. Mochn, D. Quintana, Y. Sez, and P. Isasi, Soft computing tech-
niques applied to nance, Appl. Intell., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 111115,
2007.

[4] A. Tsakonas, G. Dounias, M. Doumpos, and C. Zopounidis, Bankruptcy
prediction with neural logic networks by means of grammar-guided
genetic programming, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 449461,
2006.

[5] W.-S. Chen and Y.-K. Du, Using neural networks and data mining tech-
niques for the nancial distress prediction model, Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 40754086, 2009.

[6] C.-H. Wu, G.-H. Tzeng, Y.-J. Goo, and W.-C. Fang, A real-
valued genetic algorithm to optimize the parameters of support vector
machine for predicting bankruptcy, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 397408, 2007.

[7] H.-L. Chen et al., A novel bankruptcy prediction model based on
an adaptive fuzzy k-nearest neighbour method, Knowl.-Based Syst.,
vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 13481359, 2011.

[8] C. Lin, H. Khan, R. Chang, and Y. Wang, A new approach to modelling
early warning systems for currency crises: Can a machine-learning fuzzy
expert system predict the currency crises effectively? J. Int. Money
Financ., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 10981121, 2008.

[9] Y.-C. Tang, An approach to budget allocation for an aerospace
companyFuzzy analytic hierarchy process and articial neural
network, Neurocomputing, vol. 72, nos. 1618, pp. 34773489, 2009.
[10] H. A. Abdou, Genetic programming for credit scoring: The case
of Egyptian public sector banks, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36, no. 9,
pp. 1140211417, 2009.

[11] V. Ravi, H. Kurniawan, P. N. K. Thai, and P. R. Kumar, Soft computing
system for bank performance prediction, Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 305315, 2008.

[12] H.-J. Kim and K.-S. Shin, A hybrid approach based on neural networks
and genetic algorithms for detecting temporal patterns in stock markets,
Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 569576, 2007.

[13] J. G. Fulmer, J. E. Moon, T. A. Gavin, and M. J. Erwin, A bankruptcy
classication model for small rms, J. Commer. Bank Lend., vol. 24,
no. 2, pp. 2537, 1984.

[14] W.-Y. Lin, Y.-H. Hu, and C.-F. Tsai, Machine learning in nancial crisis
prediction: A survey, IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. C, Appl. Rev.,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 421436, Jul. 2012.

[15] J. C. Van Horne, Financial Management Policy, 12th ed. Prentice-Hall,

Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2001.

[16] G. Zhang, M. Y. Hu, B. E. Patuwo, and D. C. Indro, Articial
neural networks in bankruptcy prediction: General framework and cross-
validation analysis, Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 116, no. 1, pp. 1632,
1999.

[17] P. du Jardin, Predicting bankruptcy using neural networks and other
classication methods: The inuence of variable selection techniques on
model accuracy, Neurocomputing, vol. 73, nos. 1012, pp. 20472060,
2010.

[18] P. R. Kumar and V. Ravi, Bankruptcy prediction in banks and rms
via statistical and intelligent techniquesA review, Eur. J. Oper. Res.,
vol. 180, no. 1, pp. 128, 2007.

[19] A. Martin, T. M. Lakshmi, and V. P. Venkatesan, An analysis on qual-
itative bankruptcy prediction rules using ant-miner, Int. J. Intell. Syst.
Appl., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 3644, Dec. 2013.

[20] A. Martin, M. Manjula, and V. P. Venkatesan, A business intelligence
model to predict bankruptcy using nancial domain ontology with asso-
ciation rule mining algorithm, Int. J. Comput. Sci., vol. 8, no. 3,
pp. 211218, 2011.

[21] M. Anandarajan, P. Lee, and A. Anandarajan, Bankruptcy prediction
of nancially stressed rms: An examination of the predictive accuracy
of articial neural networks, Intell. Syst. Account. Financ. Manage.,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 6981, 2001.

[22] X. Xu and Y. Wang, Financial failure prediction using efciency as

a predictor, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 366373, 2009.

[23] S. Cho, H. Hong, and B.-C. Ha, A hybrid approach based on the combi-
nation of variable selection using decision trees and case-based reasoning
using the Mahalanobis distance: For bankruptcy prediction, Expert Syst.
Appl., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 34823488, 2010.

[24] B. Hoogs, T. Kiehl, C. Lacomb, and D. Senturk, A genetic algorithm
approach to detecting temporal patterns indicative of nancial state-
ment fraud, Intell. Syst. Account. Financ. Manage., vol. 15, nos. 12,
pp. 4156, 2007.

[25] S.-H. Mina, J. Leeb, and I. Hanb, Hybrid genetic algorithms and sup-
port vector machines for bankruptcy prediction, Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 652660, 2006.

[26] Z. Huimin, A. P. Sinha, and W. Ge, Effects of feature construc-
tion on classication performance: An empirical study in bank failure
prediction, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 26332644, 2009.

[27] A. F. Atiya, Bankruptcy prediction for credit risk using neural networks:
A survey and new results, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 12, no. 4,
pp. 929935, Jul. 2001.

[28] V. K. Koumousis and C. P. Katsaras, A saw-tooth genetic algorithm
combining the effects of variable population size and reinitialization
to enhance performance, IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 1928, Feb. 2006.

[29] T. E. McKee and T. Lensberg, Genetic programming and rough sets:
A hybrid approach to bankruptcy classication, Eur. J. Oper. Res.,
vol. 138, no. 2, pp. 436451, 2002.

[30] M.-J. Kim and D.-K. Kang, Ensemble with neural networks
for bankruptcy prediction, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 37, no. 4,
pp. 33733379, 2010.

[31] H.-J. Chen, S. Y. Huang, and C.-S. Lin, Alternative diagnosis of corpo-
rate bankruptcy: A neuro fuzzy approach, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36,
no. 4, pp. 77107720, 2009.

[32] H. Ahn and K.-J. Kim, Bankruptcy prediction modeling with hybrid
case-based reasoning and genetic algorithms approach, Appl. Soft
Comput., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 599607, 2009.

[33] K.-S. Shin and Y.-J. Lee, A genetic algorithm application in bankruptcy
prediction modelling, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 321328,
2002.

[34] A. Martin, V. Gayathri, G. Saranya, P. Gayathri, and V. P. Venkatesan,
A hybrid model for bankruptcy prediction using genetic algorithm,
fuzzy c-means and MARS, Int. J. Soft Comput., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1224,
2011.

[35] A. Martin, T. M. Lakshmi, and V. P. Venkatesan, To nd most
impact nancial features on bankruptcy models using genetic algo-
rithm, in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Eng. Technol., Nagapattinam, India, 2011,
pp. 174179.

[36] N. Chen, B. Ribeiro, A. S. Vieira, J. Duarte, and J. C. Neves, A genetic
algorithm-based approach to cost-sensitive bankruptcy prediction,
Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1293912945, 2011.

[37] A. Martin, R. Uthra, A. Kavitha, B. Divya, and V. P. Venkatesan,
A business intelligence model for predicting bankruptcy using CBR
with essential features, Int. J. Inf. Technol. Eng., vol. 3, no. 12,
pp. 9197, 2012.

[38] P. Ravisankar, V. Ravi, and I. Bose, Failure prediction of dotcom com-
panies using neural networkgenetic programming hybrids, Inf. Sci.,
vol. 180, no. 8, pp. 12571267, 2010.

[39] P. G. Espejo, S. Ventura, and F. Herrera, A survey on the applica-
tion of genetic programming to classication, IEEE Trans. Syst., Man,
Cybern. C, Appl. Rev., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 121144, Mar. 2010.

LAKSHMI et al.: GBRAT USING A GENETIC ALGORITHM TO IDENTIFY INFLUENCING FINANCIAL RATIOS

51

[40] H. Li, J. Sun, and B.-L. Sun, Financial distress prediction based on
OR-CBR in the principle of k-nearest neighbours, Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 643659, 2009.

[41] H. Li, H.-B. Huang, J. Sun, and C. Lin, On sensitivity of case-based rea-
soning to optimal feature subsets in business failure prediction, Expert
Syst. Appl., vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 48114821, 2010.

[42] H. Li and J. Sun, Case-based reasoning ensemble for business
failure prediction: A computational approach from multiple case
representations, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 32983310, 2012.
[43] Z. Yang, W. You, and G. Ji, Using partial least squares and support
vector machines for bankruptcy prediction, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 38,
no. 7, pp. 83368342, 2011.

[44] U. Shetty, T. P. M. Pakkala, and T. Mallikarjunappa, A modied direc-
tional distance formulation of DEA to assess bankruptcy: An application
to IT/ITES companies in India, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 39, no. 2,
pp. 19881997, 2012.

[45] H. Li and J. Sun, Principal component case-based reasoning ensem-
ble for business failure prediction, Inf. Manage., vol. 48, no. 6,
pp. 220227, 2011.

[46] Y.-C. Hu and C.-J. Chen, A PROMETHEE-based classication method
using concordance and discordance relations and its application to
bankruptcy prediction, Inf. Sci., vol. 181, no. 22, pp. 49594968, 2011.
[47] H. Li and J. Sun, Empirical research of hybridizing principal component
analysis with multivariate discriminant analysis and logistic regression
for business failure prediction, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 38, no. 5,
pp. 62446253, 2011.

[48] Z. Xiao, X. L. Yang, Y. Pang, and X. Dang, The prediction for listed
companies nancial distress by using multiple prediction methods with
rough set and DempsterShafer evidence theory, Knowl.-Based Syst.,
vol. 26, pp. 196206, Feb. 2011.

[49] H. Li and J. Sun, On performance of case-based reasoning in Chinese
business failure prediction from sensitivity, specicity, positive and
negative values, Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 460467, 2011.
[50] C.-F. Tsai, Feature selection in bankruptcy prediction, Knowl.-Based

Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 120127, 2009.

[51] H. Li and J. Sun, Hybridizing principles of the Electre method
with case-based reasoning for data mining: Electre-CBR-I and
Electre-CBR-II, Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 197, no. 1, pp. 214224, 2009.
[52] S.-W. Lin, Y.-R. Shiue, S.-C. Chen, and H.-M. Cheng, Applying
enhanced data mining approaches in predicting bank performance:
A case of Taiwanese commercial banks, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36,
no. 9, pp. 1154311551, 2009.

[53] H. J. Min and C. Jeong, A binary classication method for bankruptcy

prediction, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 52565263, 2009.

[54] K.-S. Shin, T. S. Lee, and H.-J. Kim, An application of support vector
machines in bankruptcy prediction model, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 28,
no. 1, pp. 127135, 2005.

[55] E. I. Altman, Financial ratios discriminant analysis and the prediction
of corporate bankruptcy, J. Financ., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 589609, 1968.
[56] E. B. Deakin, A discriminant analysis of predictors of business failure,

J. Account. Res., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 167179, 1972.

[57] R. O. Edmister, An empirical test of nancial ratio analysis for small
business failure prediction, J. Financ. Quant. Anal., vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 14771493, 1972.

[58] L. V. G. Springate, Predicting the possibility of failure in a Canadian
rm, M.B.A. Res. Project, Simon Fraser Univ., Burnaby, BC, Canada,
1978.

Travis Miranda Lakshmi is working toward the
Ph.D. degree in computer science with Bharathiar
University, Coimbatore, India.

She is an Assistant Professor with the PG and
Science,
Research Department
Josephs College (Autonomous), Cuddalore,
St.
India. Her
research interests include multicrite-
ria decision making, business intelligence, and
software engineering.

of Computer

India,

Aruldoss Martin received the B.Sc. degree in chem-
istry from St. Josephs College, Cuddalore, India,
in 1997,
the M.C.A. degree from Bharathidasan
the M.E.
University, Trichy,
degree
and engineering
from Mailam Engineering College, Mailam, India,
in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science
and engineering (banking technology)
from Pondicherry University, Puducherry, India, in
2014.

in computer

in 2000,

science

He is an Associate Professor with the Department
of Master of Computer Applications, Sri Manakula Vinayagar Engineering
College, Puducherry, India. He also is a Research Scholar of Banking
Technology, Pondicherry University, Puducherry, India. His research interests
include business intelligence, bankruptcy prediction techniques, multicrite-
ria reporting, and information delivery techniques.

Venkatasamy Prasanna Venkatesan received the
B.Sc. degree in physics from Madras University,
Chennai, India, in 1986, the M.C.A degree from
Pondicherry University, Puducherry,
in
1990, and the M.Tech. and Ph.D. degrees from
Pondicherry University, both in computer science
and engineering, in 1995 and 2008, respectively.

India,

is

He

with

an Associate Professor of Banking
University,
Technology
Puducherry,
India. He has over 20 years of
teaching and research experience in the eld of
computer science and engineering and banking technology. He has developed
an architectural reference model for multilingual software. His research
interests include software engineering, service oriented architecture, pervasive
computing, bankruptcy prediction methods, and business intelligence.

Pondicherry

